The Piazza Tales

by Herman Melville

Author of “Typee,” “Omoo,” etc., etc., etc.


New York;
Dix & Edwards, 321 Broadway.
London: Sampson Low, Son & Co.
Miller & Holman,
Printers & Stereotypers, N.Y.


1856


Contents

 The Piazza
 Bartleby
 Benito Cereno
 The Lightning-Rod Man
 The Encantadas
 The Bell-Tower




THE PIAZZA.


“With fairest flowers,
Whilst summer lasts, and I live here, Fidele—”


When I removed into the country, it was to occupy an old-fashioned
farm-house, which had no piazza—a deficiency the more regretted,
because not only did I like piazzas, as somehow combining the coziness
of in-doors with the freedom of out-doors, and it is so pleasant to
inspect your thermometer there, but the country round about was such a
picture, that in berry time no boy climbs hill or crosses vale without
coming upon easels planted in every nook, and sun-burnt painters
painting there. A very paradise of painters. The circle of the stars
cut by the circle of the mountains. At least, so looks it from the
house; though, once upon the mountains, no circle of them can you see.
Had the site been chosen five rods off, this charmed ring would not
have been.

The house is old. Seventy years since, from the heart of the Hearth
Stone Hills, they quarried the Kaaba, or Holy Stone, to which, each
Thanksgiving, the social pilgrims used to come. So long ago, that, in
digging for the foundation, the workmen used both spade and axe,
fighting the Troglodytes of those subterranean parts—sturdy roots of a
sturdy wood, encamped upon what is now a long land-slide of sleeping
meadow, sloping away off from my poppy-bed. Of that knit wood, but one
survivor stands—an elm, lonely through steadfastness.

Whoever built the house, he builded better than he knew; or else Orion
in the zenith flashed down his Damocles’ sword to him some starry
night, and said, “Build there.” For how, otherwise, could it have
entered the builder’s mind, that, upon the clearing being made, such a
purple prospect would be his?—nothing less than Greylock, with all his
hills about him, like Charlemagne among his peers.

Now, for a house, so situated in such a country, to have no piazza for
the convenience of those who might desire to feast upon the view, and
take their time and ease about it, seemed as much of an omission as if
a picture-gallery should have no bench; for what but picture-galleries
are the marble halls of these same limestone hills?—galleries hung,
month after month anew, with pictures ever fading into pictures ever
fresh. And beauty is like piety—you cannot run and read it;
tranquillity and constancy, with, now-a-days, an easy chair, are
needed. For though, of old, when reverence was in vogue, and indolence
was not, the devotees of Nature, doubtless, used to stand and
adore—just as, in the cathedrals of those ages, the worshipers of a
higher Power did—yet, in these times of failing faith and feeble knees,
we have the piazza and the pew.

During the first year of my residence, the more leisurely to witness
the coronation of Charlemagne (weather permitting, they crown him every
sunrise and sunset), I chose me, on the hill-side bank near by, a royal
lounge of turf—a green velvet lounge, with long, moss-padded back;
while at the head, strangely enough, there grew (but, I suppose, for
heraldry) three tufts of blue violets in a field-argent of wild
strawberries; and a trellis, with honeysuckle, I set for canopy. Very
majestical lounge, indeed. So much so, that here, as with the reclining
majesty of Denmark in his orchard, a sly ear-ache invaded me. But, if
damps abound at times in Westminster Abbey, because it is so old, why
not within this monastery of mountains, which is older?

A piazza must be had.

The house was wide—my fortune narrow; so that, to build a panoramic
piazza, one round and round, it could not be—although, indeed,
considering the matter by rule and square, the carpenters, in the
kindest way, were anxious to gratify my furthest wishes, at I’ve
forgotten how much a foot.

Upon but one of the four sides would prudence grant me what I wanted.
Now, which side?

To the east, that long camp of the Hearth Stone Hills, fading far away
towards Quito; and every fall, a small white flake of something peering
suddenly, of a coolish morning, from the topmost cliff—the season’s
new-dropped lamb, its earliest fleece; and then the Christmas dawn,
draping those dim highlands with red-barred plaids and tartans—goodly
sight from your piazza, that. Goodly sight; but, to the north is
Charlemagne—can’t have the Hearth Stone Hills with Charlemagne.

Well, the south side. Apple-trees are there. Pleasant, of a balmy
morning, in the month of May, to sit and see that orchard,
white-budded, as for a bridal; and, in October, one green arsenal yard;
such piles of ruddy shot. Very fine, I grant; but, to the north is
Charlemagne.

The west side, look. An upland pasture, alleying away into a maple wood
at top. Sweet, in opening spring, to trace upon the hill-side,
otherwise gray and bare—to trace, I say, the oldest paths by their
streaks of earliest green. Sweet, indeed, I can’t deny; but, to the
north is Charlemagne.

So Charlemagne, he carried it. It was not long after 1848; and,
somehow, about that time, all round the world, these kings, they had
the casting vote, and voted for themselves.

No sooner was ground broken, than all the neighborhood, neighbor Dives,
in particular, broke, too—into a laugh. Piazza to the north! Winter
piazza! Wants, of winter midnights, to watch the Aurora Borealis, I
suppose; hope he’s laid in good store of Polar muffs and mittens.

That was in the lion month of March. Not forgotten are the blue noses
of the carpenters, and how they scouted at the greenness of the cit,
who would build his sole piazza to the north. But March don’t last
forever; patience, and August comes. And then, in the cool elysium of
my northern bower, I, Lazarus in Abraham’s bosom, cast down the hill a
pitying glance on poor old Dives, tormented in the purgatory of his
piazza to the south.

But, even in December, this northern piazza does not repel—nipping cold
and gusty though it be, and the north wind, like any miller, bolting by
the snow, in finest flour—for then, once more, with frosted beard, I
pace the sleety deck, weathering Cape Horn.

In summer, too, Canute-like, sitting here, one is often reminded of the
sea. For not only do long ground-swells roll the slanting grain, and
little wavelets of the grass ripple over upon the low piazza, as their
beach, and the blown down of dandelions is wafted like the spray, and
the purple of the mountains is just the purple of the billows, and a
still August noon broods upon the deep meadows, as a calm upon the
Line; but the vastness and the lonesomeness are so oceanic, and the
silence and the sameness, too, that the first peep of a strange house,
rising beyond the trees, is for all the world like spying, on the
Barbary coast, an unknown sail.

And this recalls my inland voyage to fairy-land. A true voyage; but,
take it all in all, interesting as if invented.

From the piazza, some uncertain object I had caught, mysteriously
snugged away, to all appearance, in a sort of purpled breast-pocket,
high up in a hopper-like hollow, or sunken angle, among the
northwestern mountains—yet, whether, really, it was on a mountain-side,
or a mountain-top, could not be determined; because, though, viewed
from favorable points, a blue summit, peering up away behind the rest,
will, as it were, talk to you over their heads, and plainly tell you,
that, though he (the blue summit) seems among them, he is not of them
(God forbid!), and, indeed, would have you know that he considers
himself—as, to say truth, he has good right—by several cubits their
superior, nevertheless, certain ranges, here and there double-filed, as
in platoons, so shoulder and follow up upon one another, with their
irregular shapes and heights, that, from the piazza, a nigher and lower
mountain will, in most states of the atmosphere, effacingly shade
itself away into a higher and further one; that an object, bleak on the
former’s crest, will, for all that, appear nested in the latter’s
flank. These mountains, somehow, they play at hide-and-seek, and all
before one’s eyes.

But, be that as it may, the spot in question was, at all events, so
situated as to be only visible, and then but vaguely, under certain
witching conditions of light and shadow.

Indeed, for a year or more, I knew not there was such a spot, and
might, perhaps, have never known, had it not been for a wizard
afternoon in autumn—late in autumn—a mad poet’s afternoon; when the
turned maple woods in the broad basin below me, having lost their first
vermilion tint, dully smoked, like smouldering towns, when flames
expire upon their prey; and rumor had it, that this smokiness in the
general air was not all Indian summer—which was not used to be so sick
a thing, however mild—but, in great part, was blown from far-off
forests, for weeks on fire, in Vermont; so that no wonder the sky was
ominous as Hecate’s cauldron—and two sportsmen, crossing a red stubble
buck-wheat field, seemed guilty Macbeth and foreboding Banquo; and the
hermit-sun, hutted in an Adullum cave, well towards the south,
according to his season, did little else but, by indirect reflection of
narrow rays shot down a Simplon pass among the clouds, just steadily
paint one small, round, strawberry mole upon the wan cheek of
northwestern hills. Signal as a candle. One spot of radiance, where all
else was shade.

Fairies there, thought I; some haunted ring where fairies dance.

Time passed; and the following May, after a gentle shower upon the
mountains—a little shower islanded in misty seas of sunshine; such a
distant shower—and sometimes two, and three, and four of them, all
visible together in different parts—as I love to watch from the piazza,
instead of thunder storms, as I used to, which wrap old Greylock, like
a Sinai, till one thinks swart Moses must be climbing among scathed
hemlocks there; after, I say, that, gentle shower, I saw a rainbow,
resting its further end just where, in autumn, I had marked the mole.
Fairies there, thought I; remembering that rainbows bring out the
blooms, and that, if one can but get to the rainbow’s end, his fortune
is made in a bag of gold. Yon rainbow’s end, would I were there,
thought I. And none the less I wished it, for now first noticing what
seemed some sort of glen, or grotto, in the mountain side; at least,
whatever it was, viewed through the rainbow’s medium, it glowed like
the Potosi mine. But a work-a-day neighbor said, no doubt it was but
some old barn—an abandoned one, its broadside beaten in, the acclivity
its background. But I, though I had never been there, I knew better.

A few days after, a cheery sunrise kindled a golden sparkle in the same
spot as before. The sparkle was of that vividness, it seemed as if it
could only come from glass. The building, then—if building, after all,
it was—could, at least, not be a barn, much less an abandoned one;
stale hay ten years musting in it. No; if aught built by mortal, it
must be a cottage; perhaps long vacant and dismantled, but this very
spring magically fitted up and glazed.

Again, one noon, in the same direction, I marked, over dimmed tops of
terraced foliage, a broader gleam, as of a silver buckler, held
sunwards over some croucher’s head; which gleam, experience in like
cases taught, must come from a roof newly shingled. This, to me, made
pretty sure the recent occupancy of that far cot in fairy land.

Day after day, now, full of interest in my discovery, what time I could
spare from reading the Midsummer’s Night Dream, and all about Titania,
wishfully I gazed off towards the hills; but in vain. Either troops of
shadows, an imperial guard, with slow pace and solemn, defiled along
the steeps; or, routed by pursuing light, fled broadcast from east to
west—old wars of Lucifer and Michael; or the mountains, though unvexed
by these mirrored sham fights in the sky, had an atmosphere otherwise
unfavorable for fairy views. I was sorry; the more so, because I had to
keep my chamber for some time after—which chamber did not face those
hills.

At length, when pretty well again, and sitting out, in the September
morning, upon the piazza, and thinking to myself, when, just after a
little flock of sheep, the farmer’s banded children passed, a-nutting,
and said, “How sweet a day”—it was, after all, but what their fathers
call a weather-breeder—and, indeed, was become so sensitive through my
illness, as that I could not bear to look upon a Chinese creeper of my
adoption, and which, to my delight, climbing a post of the piazza, had
burst out in starry bloom, but now, if you removed the leaves a little,
showed millions of strange, cankerous worms, which, feeding upon those
blossoms, so shared their blessed hue, as to make it unblessed
evermore—worms, whose germs had doubtless lurked in the very bulb
which, so hopefully, I had planted: in this ingrate peevishness of my
weary convalescence, was I sitting there; when, suddenly looking off, I
saw the golden mountain-window, dazzling like a deep-sea dolphin.
Fairies there, thought I, once more; the queen of fairies at her
fairy-window; at any rate, some glad mountain-girl; it will do me good,
it will cure this weariness, to look on her. No more; I’ll launch my
yawl—ho, cheerly, heart! and push away for fairy-land—for rainbow’s
end, in fairy-land.

How to get to fairy-land, by what road, I did not know; nor could any
one inform me; not even one Edmund Spenser, who had been there—so he
wrote me—further than that to reach fairy-land, it must be voyaged to,
and with faith. I took the fairy-mountain’s bearings, and the first
fine day, when strength permitted, got into my yawl—high-pommeled,
leather one—cast off the fast, and away I sailed, free voyager as an
autumn leaf. Early dawn; and, sallying westward, I sowed the morning
before me.

Some miles brought me nigh the hills; but out of present sight of them.
I was not lost; for road-side golden-rods, as guide-posts, pointed, I
doubted not, the way to the golden window. Following them, I came to a
lone and languid region, where the grass-grown ways were traveled but
by drowsy cattle, that, less waked than stirred by day, seemed to walk
in sleep. Browse, they did not—the enchanted never eat. At least, so
says Don Quixote, that sagest sage that ever lived.

On I went, and gained at last the fairy mountain’s base, but saw yet no
fairy ring. A pasture rose before me. Letting down five mouldering
bars—so moistly green, they seemed fished up from some sunken wreck—a
wigged old Aries, long-visaged, and with crumpled horn, came snuffing
up; and then, retreating, decorously led on along a milky-way of
white-weed, past dim-clustering Pleiades and Hyades, of small
forget-me-nots; and would have led me further still his astral path,
but for golden flights of yellow-birds—pilots, surely, to the golden
window, to one side flying before me, from bush to bush, towards deep
woods—which woods themselves were luring—and, somehow, lured, too, by
their fence, banning a dark road, which, however dark, led up. I pushed
through; when Aries, renouncing me now for some lost soul, wheeled, and
went his wiser way. Forbidding and forbidden ground—to him.

A winter wood road, matted all along with winter-green. By the side of
pebbly waters—waters the cheerier for their solitude; beneath swaying
fir-boughs, petted by no season, but still green in all, on I
journeyed—my horse and I; on, by an old saw-mill, bound down and hushed
with vines, that his grating voice no more was heard; on, by a deep
flume clove through snowy marble, vernal-tinted, where freshet eddies
had, on each side, spun out empty chapels in the living rock; on, where
Jacks-in-the-pulpit, like their Baptist namesake, preached but to the
wilderness; on, where a huge, cross-grain block, fern-bedded, showed
where, in forgotten times, man after man had tried to split it, but
lost his wedges for his pains—which wedges yet rusted in their holes;
on, where, ages past, in step-like ledges of a cascade, skull-hollow
pots had been churned out by ceaseless whirling of a flintstone—ever
wearing, but itself unworn; on, by wild rapids pouring into a secret
pool, but soothed by circling there awhile, issued forth serenely; on,
to less broken ground, and by a little ring, where, truly, fairies must
have danced, or else some wheel-tire been heated—for all was bare;
still on, and up, and out into a hanging orchard, where maidenly looked
down upon me a crescent moon, from morning.

My horse hitched low his head. Red apples rolled before him; Eve’s
apples; seek-no-furthers. He tasted one, I another; it tasted of the
ground. Fairy land not yet, thought I, flinging my bridle to a humped
old tree, that crooked out an arm to catch it. For the way now lay
where path was none, and none might go but by himself, and only go by
daring. Through blackberry brakes that tried to pluck me back, though I
but strained towards fruitless growths of mountain-laurel; up slippery
steeps to barren heights, where stood none to welcome. Fairy land not
yet, thought I, though the morning is here before me.

Foot-sore enough and weary, I gained not then my journey’s end, but
came ere long to a craggy pass, dipping towards growing regions still
beyond. A zigzag road, half overgrown with blueberry bushes, here
turned among the cliffs. A rent was in their ragged sides; through it a
little track branched off, which, upwards threading that short defile,
came breezily out above, to where the mountain-top, part sheltered
northward, by a taller brother, sloped gently off a space, ere darkly
plunging; and here, among fantastic rocks, reposing in a herd, the
foot-track wound, half beaten, up to a little, low-storied, grayish
cottage, capped, nun-like, with a peaked roof.

On one slope, the roof was deeply weather-stained, and, nigh the turfy
eaves-trough, all velvet-napped; no doubt the snail-monks founded mossy
priories there. The other slope was newly shingled. On the north side,
doorless and windowless, the clap-boards, innocent of paint, were yet
green as the north side of lichened pines or copperless hulls of
Japanese junks, becalmed. The whole base, like those of the neighboring
rocks, was rimmed about with shaded streaks of richest sod; for, with
hearth-stones in fairy land, the natural rock, though housed, preserves
to the last, just as in open fields, its fertilizing charm; only, by
necessity, working now at a remove, to the sward without. So, at least,
says Oberon, grave authority in fairy lore. Though setting Oberon
aside, certain it is, that, even in the common world, the soil, close
up to farm-houses, as close up to pasture rocks, is, even though
untended, ever richer than it is a few rods off—such gentle, nurturing
heat is radiated there.

But with this cottage, the shaded streaks were richest in its front and
about its entrance, where the ground-sill, and especially the doorsill
had, through long eld, quietly settled down.

No fence was seen, no inclosure. Near by—ferns, ferns, ferns;
further—woods, woods, woods; beyond—mountains, mountains, mountains;
then—sky, sky, sky. Turned out in aerial commons, pasture for the
mountain moon. Nature, and but nature, house and, all; even a low
cross-pile of silver birch, piled openly, to season; up among whose
silvery sticks, as through the fencing of some sequestered grave,
sprang vagrant raspberry bushes—willful assertors of their right of
way.

The foot-track, so dainty narrow, just like a sheep-track, led through
long ferns that lodged. Fairy land at last, thought I; Una and her lamb
dwell here. Truly, a small abode—mere palanquin, set down on the
summit, in a pass between two worlds, participant of neither.

A sultry hour, and I wore a light hat, of yellow sinnet, with white
duck trowsers—both relics of my tropic sea-going. Clogged in the
muffling ferns, I softly stumbled, staining the knees a sea-green.

Pausing at the threshold, or rather where threshold once had been, I
saw, through the open door-way, a lonely girl, sewing at a lonely
window. A pale-cheeked girl, and fly-specked window, with wasps about
the mended upper panes. I spoke. She shyly started, like some Tahiti
girl, secreted for a sacrifice, first catching sight, through palms, of
Captain Cook. Recovering, she bade me enter; with her apron brushed off
a stool; then silently resumed her own. With thanks I took the stool;
but now, for a space, I, too, was mute. This, then, is the
fairy-mountain house, and here, the fairy queen sitting at her fairy
window.

I went up to it. Downwards, directed by the tunneled pass, as through a
leveled telescope, I caught sight of a far-off, soft, azure world. I
hardly knew it, though I came from it.

“You must find this view very pleasant,” said I, at last.

“Oh, sir,” tears starting in her eyes, “the first time I looked out of
this window, I said ‘never, never shall I weary of this.’”

“And what wearies you of it now?”

“I don’t know,” while a tear fell; “but it is not the view, it is
Marianna.”

Some months back, her brother, only seventeen, had come hither, a long
way from the other side, to cut wood and burn coal, and she, elder
sister, had accompanied, him. Long had they been orphans, and now, sole
inhabitants of the sole house upon the mountain. No guest came, no
traveler passed. The zigzag, perilous road was only used at seasons by
the coal wagons. The brother was absent the entire day, sometimes the
entire night. When at evening, fagged out, he did come home, he soon
left his bench, poor fellow, for his bed; just as one, at last, wearily
quits that, too, for still deeper rest. The bench, the bed, the grave.

Silent I stood by the fairy window, while these things were being told.

“Do you know,” said she at last, as stealing from her story, “do you
know who lives yonder?—I have never been down into that country—away
off there, I mean; that house, that marble one,” pointing far across
the lower landscape; “have you not caught it? there, on the long
hill-side: the field before, the woods behind; the white shines out
against their blue; don’t you mark it? the only house in sight.”

I looked; and after a time, to my surprise, recognized, more by its
position than its aspect, or Marianna’s description, my own abode,
glimmering much like this mountain one from the piazza. The mirage haze
made it appear less a farm-house than King Charming’s palace.

“I have often wondered who lives there; but it must be some happy one;
again this morning was I thinking so.”

“Some happy one,” returned I, starting; “and why do you think that? You
judge some rich one lives there?”

“Rich or not, I never thought; but it looks so happy, I can’t tell how;
and it is so far away. Sometimes I think I do but dream it is there.
You should see it in a sunset.”

“No doubt the sunset gilds it finely; but not more than the sunrise
does this house, perhaps.”

“This house? The sun is a good sun, but it never gilds this house. Why
should it? This old house is rotting. That makes it so mossy. In the
morning, the sun comes in at this old window, to be sure—boarded up,
when first we came; a window I can’t keep clean, do what I may—and half
burns, and nearly blinds me at my sewing, besides setting the flies and
wasps astir—such flies and wasps as only lone mountain houses know.
See, here is the curtain—this apron—I try to shut it out with then. It
fades it, you see. Sun gild this house? not that ever Marianna saw.”

“Because when this roof is gilded most, then you stay here within.”

“The hottest, weariest hour of day, you mean? Sir, the sun gilds not
this roof. It leaked so, brother newly shingled all one side. Did you
not see it? The north side, where the sun strikes most on what the rain
has wetted. The sun is a good sun; but this roof, in first scorches,
and then rots. An old house. They went West, and are long dead, they
say, who built it. A mountain house. In winter no fox could den in it.
That chimney-place has been blocked up with snow, just like a hollow
stump.”

“Yours are strange fancies, Marianna.”

“They but reflect the things.”

“Then I should have said, ‘These are strange things,’ rather than,
‘Yours are strange fancies.’”

“As you will;” and took up her sewing.

Something in those quiet words, or in that quiet act, it made me mute
again; while, noting, through the fairy window, a broad shadow stealing
on, as cast by some gigantic condor, floating at brooding poise on
outstretched wings, I marked how, by its deeper and inclusive dusk, it
wiped away into itself all lesser shades of rock or fern.

“You watch the cloud,” said Marianna.

“No, a shadow; a cloud’s, no doubt—though that I cannot see. How did
you know it? Your eyes are on your work.”

“It dusked my work. There, now the cloud is gone, Tray comes back.”

“How?”

“The dog, the shaggy dog. At noon, he steals off, of himself, to change
his shape—returns, and lies down awhile, nigh the door. Don’t you see
him? His head is turned round at you; though, when you came, he looked
before him.”

“Your eyes rest but on your work; what do you speak of?”

“By the window, crossing.”

“You mean this shaggy shadow—the nigh one? And, yes, now that I mark
it, it is not unlike a large, black Newfoundland dog. The invading
shadow gone, the invaded one returns. But I do not see what casts it.”

“For that, you must go without.”

“One of those grassy rocks, no doubt.”

“You see his head, his face?”

“The shadow’s? You speak as if _you_ saw it, and all the time your eyes
are on your work.”

“Tray looks at you,” still without glancing up; “this is his hour; I
see him.”

“Have you then, so long sat at this mountain-window, where but clouds
and, vapors pass, that, to you, shadows are as things, though you speak
of them as of phantoms; that, by familiar knowledge, working like a
second sight, you can, without looking for them, tell just where they
are, though, as having mice-like feet, they creep about, and come and
go; that, to you, these lifeless shadows are as living friends, who,
though out of sight, are not out of mind, even in their faces—is it
so?”

“That way I never thought of it. But the friendliest one, that used to
soothe my weariness so much, coolly quivering on the ferns, it was
taken from me, never to return, as Tray did just now. The shadow of a
birch. The tree was struck by lightning, and brother cut it up. You saw
the cross-pile out-doors—the buried root lies under it; but not the
shadow. That is flown, and never will come back, nor ever anywhere stir
again.”

Another cloud here stole along, once more blotting out the dog, and
blackening all the mountain; while the stillness was so still, deafness
might have forgot itself, or else believed that noiseless shadow spoke.

“Birds, Marianna, singing-birds, I hear none; I hear nothing. Boys and
bob-o-links, do they never come a-berrying up here?”

“Birds, I seldom hear; boys, never. The berries mostly ripe and
fall—few, but me, the wiser.”

“But yellow-birds showed me the way—part way, at least.”

“And then flew back. I guess they play about the mountain-side, but
don’t make the top their home. And no doubt you think that, living so
lonesome here, knowing nothing, hearing nothing—little, at least, but
sound of thunder and the fall of trees—never reading, seldom speaking,
yet ever wakeful, this is what gives me my strange thoughts—for so you
call them—this weariness and wakefulness together Brother, who stands
and works in open air, would I could rest like him; but mine is mostly
but dull woman’s work—sitting, sitting, restless sitting.”

“But, do you not go walk at times? These woods are wide.”

“And lonesome; lonesome, because so wide. Sometimes, ’tis true, of
afternoons, I go a little way; but soon come back again. Better feel
lone by hearth, than rock. The shadows hereabouts I know—those in the
woods are strangers.”

“But the night?”

“Just like the day. Thinking, thinking—a wheel I cannot stop; pure want
of sleep it is that turns it.”

“I have heard that, for this wakeful weariness, to say one’s prayers,
and then lay one’s head upon a fresh hop pillow—”

“Look!”

Through the fairy window, she pointed down the steep to a small garden
patch near by—mere pot of rifled loam, half rounded in by sheltering
rocks—where, side by side, some feet apart, nipped and puny, two
hop-vines climbed two poles, and, gaining their tip-ends, would have
then joined over in an upward clasp, but the baffled shoots, groping
awhile in empty air, trailed back whence they sprung.

“You have tried the pillow, then?”

“Yes.”

“And prayer?”

“Prayer and pillow.”

“Is there no other cure, or charm?”

“Oh, if I could but once get to yonder house, and but look upon whoever
the happy being is that lives there! A foolish thought: why do I think
it? Is it that I live so lonesome, and know nothing?”

“I, too, know nothing; and, therefore, cannot answer; but, for your
sake, Marianna, well could wish that I were that happy one of the happy
house you dream you see; for then you would behold him now, and, as you
say, this weariness might leave you.”

—Enough. Launching my yawl no more for fairy-land, I stick to the
piazza. It is my box-royal; and this amphitheatre, my theatre of San
Carlo. Yes, the scenery is magical—the illusion so complete. And Madam
Meadow Lark, my prima donna, plays her grand engagement here; and,
drinking in her sunrise note, which, Memnon-like, seems struck from the
golden window, how far from me the weary face behind it.

But, every night, when the curtain falls, truth comes in with darkness.
No light shows from the mountain. To and fro I walk the piazza deck,
haunted by Marianna’s face, and many as real a story.




BARTLEBY.


I am a rather elderly man. The nature of my avocations, for the last
thirty years, has brought me into more than ordinary contact with what
would seem an interesting and somewhat singular set of men, of whom, as
yet, nothing, that I know of, has ever been written—I mean, the
law-copyists, or scriveners. I have known very many of them,
professionally and privately, and, if I pleased, could relate divers
histories, at which good-natured gentlemen might smile, and sentimental
souls might weep. But I waive the biographies of all other scriveners,
for a few passages in the life of Bartleby, who was a scrivener, the
strangest I ever saw, or heard of. While, of other law-copyists, I
might write the complete life, of Bartleby nothing of that sort can be
done. I believe that no materials exist, for a full and satisfactory
biography of this man. It is an irreparable loss to literature.
Bartleby was one of those beings of whom nothing is ascertainable,
except from the original sources, and, in his case, those are very
small. What my own astonished eyes saw of Bartleby, _that_ is all I
know of him, except, indeed, one vague report, which will appear in the
sequel.

Ere introducing the scrivener, as he first appeared to me, it is fit I
make some mention of myself, my _employés_, my business, my chambers,
and general surroundings; because some such description is
indispensable to an adequate understanding of the chief character about
to be presented. Imprimis: I am a man who, from his youth upwards, has
been filled with a profound conviction that the easiest way of life is
the best. Hence, though I belong to a profession proverbially energetic
and nervous, even to turbulence, at times, yet nothing of that sort
have I ever suffered to invade my peace. I am one of those unambitious
lawyers who never addresses a jury, or in any way draws down public
applause; but, in the cool tranquillity of a snug retreat, do a snug
business among rich men’s bonds, and mortgages, and title-deeds. All
who know me, consider me an eminently _safe_ man. The late John Jacob
Astor, a personage little given to poetic enthusiasm, had no hesitation
in pronouncing my first grand point to be prudence; my next, method. I
do not speak it in vanity, but simply record the fact, that I was not
unemployed in my profession by the late John Jacob Astor; a name which,
I admit, I love to repeat; for it hath a rounded and orbicular sound to
it, and rings like unto bullion. I will freely add, that I was not
insensible to the late John Jacob Astor’s good opinion.

Some time prior to the period at which this little history begins, my
avocations had been largely increased. The good old office, now extinct
in the State of New York, of a Master in Chancery, had been conferred
upon me. It was not a very arduous office, but very pleasantly
remunerative. I seldom lose my temper; much more seldom indulge in
dangerous indignation at wrongs and outrages; but, I must be permitted
to be rash here, and declare, that I consider the sudden and violent
abrogation of the office of Master in Chancery, by the new
Constitution, as a —— premature act; inasmuch as I had counted upon a
life-lease of the profits, whereas I only received those of a few short
years. But this is by the way.

My chambers were up stairs, at No. —— Wall street. At one end, they
looked upon the white wall of the interior of a spacious skylight
shaft, penetrating the building from top to bottom.

This view might have been considered rather tame than otherwise,
deficient in what landscape painters call “life.” But, if so, the view
from the other end of my chambers offered, at least, a contrast, if
nothing more. In that direction, my windows commanded an unobstructed
view of a lofty brick wall, black by age and everlasting shade; which
wall required no spy-glass to bring out its lurking beauties, but, for
the benefit of all near-sighted spectators, was pushed up to within ten
feet of my window panes. Owing to the great height of the surrounding
buildings, and my chambers being on the second floor, the interval
between this wall and mine not a little resembled a huge square
cistern.

At the period just preceding the advent of Bartleby, I had two persons
as copyists in my employment, and a promising lad as an office-boy.
First, Turkey; second, Nippers; third, Ginger Nut. These may seem
names, the like of which are not usually found in the Directory. In
truth, they were nicknames, mutually conferred upon each other by my
three clerks, and were deemed expressive of their respective persons or
characters. Turkey was a short, pursy Englishman, of about my own
age—that is, somewhere not far from sixty. In the morning, one might
say, his face was of a fine florid hue, but after twelve o’clock,
meridian—his dinner hour—it blazed like a grate full of Christmas
coals; and continued blazing—but, as it were, with a gradual wane—till
six o’clock, P.M., or thereabouts; after which, I saw no more of the
proprietor of the face, which, gaining its meridian with the sun,
seemed to set with it, to rise, culminate, and decline the following
day, with the like regularity and undiminished glory. There are many
singular coincidences I have known in the course of my life, not the
least among which was the fact, that, exactly when Turkey displayed his
fullest beams from his red and radiant countenance, just then, too, at
that critical moment, began the daily period when I considered his
business capacities as seriously disturbed for the remainder of the
twenty-four hours. Not that he was absolutely idle, or averse to
business, then; far from it. The difficulty was, he was apt to be
altogether too energetic. There was a strange, inflamed, flurried,
flighty recklessness of activity about him. He would be incautious in
dipping his pen into his inkstand. All his blots upon my documents were
dropped there after twelve o’clock, meridian. Indeed, not only would he
be reckless, and sadly given to making blots in the afternoon, but,
some days, he went further, and was rather noisy. At such times, too,
his face flamed with augmented blazonry, as if cannel coal had been
heaped on anthracite. He made an unpleasant racket with his chair;
spilled his sand-box; in mending his pens, impatiently split them all
to pieces, and threw them on the floor in a sudden passion; stood up,
and leaned over his table, boxing his papers about in a most indecorous
manner, very sad to behold in an elderly man like him. Nevertheless, as
he was in many ways a most valuable person to me, and all the time
before twelve o’clock, meridian, was the quickest, steadiest creature,
too, accomplishing a great deal of work in a style not easily to be
matched—for these reasons, I was willing to overlook his
eccentricities, though, indeed, occasionally, I remonstrated with him.
I did this very gently, however, because, though the civilest, nay, the
blandest and most reverential of men in the morning, yet, in the
afternoon, he was disposed, upon provocation, to be slightly rash with
his tongue—in fact, insolent. Now, valuing his morning services as I
did, and resolved not to lose them—yet, at the same time, made
uncomfortable by his inflamed ways after twelve o’clock—and being a man
of peace, unwilling by my admonitions to call forth unseemly retorts
from him, I took upon me, one Saturday noon (he was always worse on
Saturdays) to hint to him, very kindly, that, perhaps, now that he was
growing old, it might be well to abridge his labors; in short, he need
not come to my chambers after twelve o’clock, but, dinner over, had
best go home to his lodgings, and rest himself till tea-time. But no;
he insisted upon his afternoon devotions. His countenance became
intolerably fervid, as he oratorically assured me—gesticulating with a
long ruler at the other end of the room—that if his services in the
morning were useful, how indispensable, then, in the afternoon?

“With submission, sir,” said Turkey, on this occasion, “I consider
myself your right-hand man. In the morning I but marshal and deploy my
columns; but in the afternoon I put myself at their head, and gallantly
charge the foe, thus”—and he made a violent thrust with the ruler.

“But the blots, Turkey,” intimated I.

“True; but, with submission, sir, behold these hairs! I am getting old.
Surely, sir, a blot or two of a warm afternoon is not to be severely
urged against gray hairs. Old age—even if it blot the page—is
honorable. With submission, sir, we _both_ are getting old.”

This appeal to my fellow-feeling was hardly to be resisted. At all
events, I saw that go he would not. So, I made up my mind to let him
stay, resolving, nevertheless, to see to it that, during the afternoon,
he had to do with my less important papers.

Nippers, the second on my list, was a whiskered, sallow, and, upon the
whole, rather piratical-looking young man, of about five and twenty. I
always deemed him the victim of two evil powers—ambition and
indigestion. The ambition was evinced by a certain impatience of the
duties of a mere copyist, an unwarrantable usurpation of strictly
professional affairs, such as the original drawing up of legal
documents. The indigestion seemed betokened in an occasional nervous
testiness and grinning irritability, causing the teeth to audibly grind
together over mistakes committed in copying; unnecessary maledictions,
hissed, rather than spoken, in the heat of business; and especially by
a continual discontent with the height of the table where he worked.
Though of a very ingenious mechanical turn, Nippers could never get
this table to suit him. He put chips under it, blocks of various sorts,
bits of pasteboard, and at last went so far as to attempt an exquisite
adjustment, by final pieces of folded blotting-paper. But no invention
would answer. If, for the sake of easing his back, he brought the table
lid at a sharp angle well up towards his chin, and wrote, there like a
man using the steep roof of a Dutch house for his desk, then he
declared that it stopped the circulation in his arms. If now he lowered
the table to his waistbands, and stooped over it in writing, then there
was a sore aching in his back. In short, the truth of the matter was,
Nippers knew not what he wanted. Or, if he wanted anything, it was to
be rid of a scrivener’s table altogether. Among the manifestations of
his diseased ambition was a fondness he had for receiving visits from
certain ambiguous-looking fellows in seedy coats, whom he called his
clients. Indeed, I was aware that not only was he, at times,
considerable of a ward-politician, but he occasionally did a little
business at the Justices’ courts, and was not unknown on the steps of
the Tombs. I have good reason to believe, however, that one individual
who called upon him at my chambers, and who, with a grand air, he
insisted was his client, was no other than a dun, and the alleged
title-deed, a bill. But, with all his failings, and the annoyances he
caused me, Nippers, like his compatriot Turkey, was a very useful man
to me; wrote a neat, swift hand; and, when he chose, was not deficient
in a gentlemanly sort of deportment. Added to this, he always dressed
in a gentlemanly sort of way; and so, incidentally, reflected credit
upon my chambers. Whereas, with respect to Turkey, I had much ado to
keep him from being a reproach to me. His clothes were apt to look
oily, and smell of eating-houses. He wore his pantaloons very loose and
baggy in summer. His coats were execrable; his hat not to be handled.
But while the hat was a thing of indifference to me, inasmuch as his
natural civility and deference, as a dependent Englishman, always led
him to doff it the moment he entered the room, yet his coat was another
matter. Concerning his coats, I reasoned with him; but with no effect.
The truth was, I suppose, that a man with so small an income could not
afford to sport such a lustrous face and a lustrous coat at one and the
same time. As Nippers once observed, Turkey’s money went chiefly for
red ink. One winter day, I presented Turkey with a highly
respectable-looking coat of my own—a padded gray coat, of a most
comfortable warmth, and which buttoned straight up from the knee to the
neck. I thought Turkey would appreciate the favor, and abate his
rashness and obstreperousness of afternoons. But no; I verily believe
that buttoning himself up in so downy and blanket-like a coat had a
pernicious effect upon him—upon the same principle that too much oats
are bad for horses. In fact, precisely as a rash, restive horse is said
to feel his oats, so Turkey felt his coat. It made him insolent. He was
a man whom prosperity harmed.

Though, concerning the self-indulgent habits of Turkey, I had my own
private surmises, yet, touching Nippers, I was well persuaded that,
whatever might be his faults in other respects, he was, at least, a
temperate young man. But, indeed, nature herself seemed to have been
his vintner, and, at his birth, charged him so thoroughly with an
irritable, brandy-like disposition, that all subsequent potations were
needless. When I consider how, amid the stillness of my chambers,
Nippers would sometimes impatiently rise from his seat, and stooping
over his table, spread his arms wide apart, seize the whole desk, and
move it, and jerk it, with a grim, grinding motion on the floor, as if
the table were a perverse voluntary agent, intent on thwarting and
vexing him, I plainly perceive that, for Nippers, brandy-and-water were
altogether superfluous.

It was fortunate for me that, owing to its peculiar
cause—indigestion—the irritability and consequent nervousness of
Nippers were mainly observable in the morning, while in the afternoon
he was comparatively mild. So that, Turkey’s paroxysms only coming on
about twelve o’clock, I never had to do with their eccentricities at
one time. Their fits relieved each other, like guards. When Nippers’s
was on, Turkey’s was off; and _vice versa_. This was a good natural
arrangement, under the circumstances.

Ginger Nut, the third on my list, was a lad, some twelve years old.
His, father was a carman, ambitious of seeing his son on the bench
instead of a cart, before he died. So he sent him to my office, as
student at law, errand-boy, cleaner and sweeper, at the rate of one
dollar a week. He had a little desk to himself, but he did not use it
much. Upon inspection, the drawer exhibited a great array of the shells
of various sorts of nuts. Indeed, to this quick-witted youth, the whole
noble science of the law was contained in a nut-shell. Not the least
among the employments of Ginger Nut, as well as one which he discharged
with the most alacrity, was his duty as cake and apple purveyor for
Turkey and Nippers. Copying law-papers being proverbially a dry, husky
sort of business, my two scriveners were fain to moisten their mouths
very often with Spitzenbergs, to be had at the numerous stalls nigh the
Custom House and Post Office. Also, they sent Ginger Nut very
frequently for that peculiar cake—small, flat, round, and very
spicy—after which he had been named by them. Of a cold morning, when
business was but dull, Turkey would gobble up scores of these cakes, as
if they were mere wafers—indeed, they sell them at the rate of six or
eight for a penny—the scrape of his pen blending with the crunching of
the crisp particles in his mouth. Of all the fiery afternoon blunders
and flurried rashnesses of Turkey, was his once moistening a
ginger-cake between his lips, and clapping it on to a mortgage, for a
seal. I came within an ace of dismissing him then. But he mollified me
by making an oriental bow, and saying—

“With submission, sir, it was generous of me to find you in stationery
on my own account.”

Now my original business—that of a conveyancer and title hunter, and
drawer-up of recondite documents of all sorts—was considerably
increased by receiving the master’s office. There was now great work
for scriveners. Not only must I push the clerks already with me, but I
must have additional help.

In answer to my advertisement, a motionless young man one morning stood
upon my office threshold, the door being open, for it was summer. I can
see that figure now—pallidly neat, pitiably respectable, incurably
forlorn! It was Bartleby.

After a few words touching his qualifications, I engaged him, glad to
have among my corps of copyists a man of so singularly sedate an
aspect, which I thought might operate beneficially upon the flighty
temper of Turkey, and the fiery one of Nippers.

I should have stated before that ground glass folding-doors divided my
premises into two parts, one of which was occupied by my scriveners,
the other by myself. According to my humor, I threw open these doors,
or closed them. I resolved to assign Bartleby a corner by the
folding-doors, but on my side of them, so as to have this quiet man
within easy call, in case any trifling thing was to be done. I placed
his desk close up to a small side-window in that part of the room, a
window which originally had afforded a lateral view of certain grimy
backyards and bricks, but which, owing to subsequent erections,
commanded at present no view at all, though it gave some light. Within
three feet of the panes was a wall, and the light came down from far
above, between two lofty buildings, as from a very small opening in a
dome. Still further to a satisfactory arrangement, I procured a high
green folding screen, which might entirely isolate Bartleby from my
sight, though not remove him from my voice. And thus, in a manner,
privacy and society were conjoined.

At first, Bartleby did an extraordinary quantity of writing. As if long
famishing for something to copy, he seemed to gorge himself on my
documents. There was no pause for digestion. He ran a day and night
line, copying by sun-light and by candle-light. I should have been
quite delighted with his application, had he been cheerfully
industrious. But he wrote on silently, palely, mechanically.

It is, of course, an indispensable part of a scrivener’s business to
verify the accuracy of his copy, word by word. Where there are two or
more scriveners in an office, they assist each other in this
examination, one reading from the copy, the other holding the original.
It is a very dull, wearisome, and lethargic affair. I can readily
imagine that, to some sanguine temperaments, it would be altogether
intolerable. For example, I cannot credit that the mettlesome poet,
Byron, would have contentedly sat down with Bartleby to examine a law
document of, say five hundred pages, closely written in a crimpy hand.

Now and then, in the haste of business, it had been my habit to assist
in comparing some brief document myself, calling Turkey or Nippers for
this purpose. One object I had, in placing Bartleby so handy to me
behind the screen, was, to avail myself of his services on such trivial
occasions. It was on the third day, I think, of his being with me, and
before any necessity had arisen for having his own writing examined,
that, being much hurried to complete a small affair I had in hand, I
abruptly called to Bartleby. In my haste and natural expectancy of
instant compliance, I sat with my head bent over the original on my
desk, and my right hand sideways, and somewhat nervously extended with
the copy, so that, immediately upon emerging from his retreat, Bartleby
might snatch it and proceed to business without the least delay.

In this very attitude did I sit when I called to him, rapidly stating
what it was I wanted him to do—namely, to examine a small paper with
me. Imagine my surprise, nay, my consternation, when, without moving
from his privacy, Bartleby, in a singularly mild, firm voice, replied,
“I would prefer not to.”

I sat awhile in perfect silence, rallying my stunned faculties.
Immediately it occurred to me that my ears had deceived me, or Bartleby
had entirely misunderstood my meaning. I repeated my request in the
clearest tone I could assume; but in quite as clear a one came the
previous reply, “I would prefer not to.”

“Prefer not to,” echoed I, rising in high excitement, and crossing the
room with a stride. “What do you mean? Are you moon-struck? I want you
to help me compare this sheet here—take it,” and I thrust it towards
him.

“I would prefer not to,” said he.

I looked at him steadfastly. His face was leanly composed; his gray eye
dimly calm. Not a wrinkle of agitation rippled him. Had there been the
least uneasiness, anger, impatience or impertinence in his manner; in
other words, had there been any thing ordinarily human about him,
doubtless I should have violently dismissed him from the premises. But
as it was, I should have as soon thought of turning my pale
plaster-of-paris bust of Cicero out of doors. I stood gazing at him
awhile, as he went on with his own writing, and then reseated myself at
my desk. This is very strange, thought I. What had one best do? But my
business hurried me. I concluded to forget the matter for the present,
reserving it for my future leisure. So calling Nippers from the other
room, the paper was speedily examined.

A few days after this, Bartleby concluded four lengthy documents, being
quadruplicates of a week’s testimony taken before me in my High Court
of Chancery. It became necessary to examine them. It was an important
suit, and great accuracy was imperative. Having all things arranged, I
called Turkey, Nippers and Ginger Nut, from the next room, meaning to
place the four copies in the hands of my four clerks, while I should
read from the original. Accordingly, Turkey, Nippers, and Ginger Nut
had taken their seats in a row, each with his document in his hand,
when I called to Bartleby to join this interesting group.

“Bartleby! quick, I am waiting.”

I heard a slow scrape of his chair legs on the uncarpeted floor, and
soon he appeared standing at the entrance of his hermitage.

“What is wanted?” said he, mildly.

“The copies, the copies,” said I, hurriedly. “We are going to examine
them. There”—and I held towards him the fourth quadruplicate.

“I would prefer not to,” he said, and gently disappeared behind the
screen.

For a few moments I was turned into a pillar of salt, standing at the
head of my seated column of clerks. Recovering myself, I advanced
towards the screen, and demanded the reason for such extraordinary
conduct.

“_Why_ do you refuse?”

“I would prefer not to.”

With any other man I should have flown outright into a dreadful
passion, scorned all further words, and thrust him ignominiously from
my presence. But there was something about Bartleby that not only
strangely disarmed me, but, in a wonderful manner, touched and
disconcerted me. I began to reason with him.

“These are your own copies we are about to examine. It is labor saving
to you, because one examination will answer for your four papers. It is
common usage. Every copyist is bound to help examine his copy. Is it
not so? Will you not speak? Answer!”

“I prefer not to,” he replied in a flutelike tone. It seemed to me
that, while I had been addressing him, he carefully revolved every
statement that I made; fully comprehended the meaning; could not
gainsay the irresistible conclusion; but, at the same time, some
paramount consideration prevailed with him to reply as he did.

“You are decided, then, not to comply with my request—a request made
according to common usage and common sense?”

He briefly gave me to understand, that on that point my judgment was
sound. Yes: his decision was irreversible.

It is not seldom the case that, when a man is browbeaten in some
unprecedented and violently unreasonable way, he begins to stagger in
his own plainest faith. He begins, as it were, vaguely to surmise that,
wonderful as it may be, all the justice and all the reason is on the
other side. Accordingly, if any disinterested persons are present, he
turns to them for some reinforcement for his own faltering mind.

“Turkey,” said I, “what do you think of this? Am I not right?”

“With submission, sir,” said Turkey, in his blandest tone, “I think
that you are.”

“Nippers,” said I, “what do _you_ think of it?”

“I think I should kick him out of the office.”

(The reader, of nice perceptions, will here perceive that, it being
morning, Turkey’s answer is couched in polite and tranquil terms, but
Nippers replies in ill-tempered ones. Or, to repeat a previous
sentence, Nippers’s ugly mood was on duty, and Turkey’s off.)

“Ginger Nut,” said I, willing to enlist the smallest suffrage in my
behalf, “what do _you_ think of it?”

“I think, sir, he’s a little _luny_,” replied Ginger Nut, with a grin.

“You hear what they say,” said I, turning towards the screen, “come
forth and do your duty.”

But he vouchsafed no reply. I pondered a moment in sore perplexity. But
once more business hurried me. I determined again to postpone the
consideration of this dilemma to my future leisure. With a little
trouble we made out to examine the papers without Bartleby, though at
every page or two Turkey deferentially dropped his opinion, that this
proceeding was quite out of the common; while Nippers, twitching in his
chair with a dyspeptic nervousness, ground out, between his set teeth,
occasional hissing maledictions against the stubborn oaf behind the
screen. And for his (Nippers’s) part, this was the first and the last
time he would do another man’s business without pay.

Meanwhile Bartleby sat in his hermitage, oblivious to everything but
his own peculiar business there.

Some days passed, the scrivener being employed upon another lengthy
work. His late remarkable conduct led me to regard his ways narrowly. I
observed that he never went to dinner; indeed, that he never went
anywhere. As yet I had never, of my personal knowledge, known him to be
outside of my office. He was a perpetual sentry in the corner. At about
eleven o’clock though, in the morning, I noticed that Ginger Nut would
advance toward the opening in Bartleby’s screen, as if silently
beckoned thither by a gesture invisible to me where I sat. The boy
would then leave the office, jingling a few pence, and reappear with a
handful of ginger-nuts, which he delivered in the hermitage, receiving
two of the cakes for his trouble.

He lives, then, on ginger-nuts, thought I; never eats a dinner,
properly speaking; he must be a vegetarian, then; but no; he never eats
even vegetables, he eats nothing but ginger-nuts. My mind then ran on
in reveries concerning the probable effects upon the human constitution
of living entirely on ginger-nuts. Ginger-nuts are so called, because
they contain ginger as one of their peculiar constituents, and the
final flavoring one. Now, what was ginger? A hot, spicy thing. Was
Bartleby hot and spicy? Not at all. Ginger, then, had no effect upon
Bartleby. Probably, he preferred it should have none.

Nothing so aggravates an earnest person as a passive resistance. If the
individual so resisted be of a not inhumane temper, and the resisting
one perfectly harmless in his passivity, then, in the better moods of
the former, he will endeavor charitably to construe to his imagination
what proves impossible to be solved by his judgment. Even so, for the
most part, I regarded Bartleby and his ways. Poor fellow! thought I, he
means no mischief; it is plain he intends no insolence; his aspect
sufficiently evinces that his eccentricities are involuntary. He is
useful to me. I can get along with him. If I turn him away, the chances
are he will fall in with some less-indulgent employer, and then he will
be rudely treated, and perhaps driven forth miserably to starve. Yes.
Here I can cheaply purchase a delicious self-approval. To befriend
Bartleby; to humor him in his strange willfulness, will cost me little
or nothing, while I lay up in my soul what will eventually prove a
sweet morsel for my conscience. But this mood was not invariable, with
me. The passiveness of Bartleby sometimes irritated me. I felt
strangely goaded on to encounter him in new opposition—to elicit some
angry spark from him answerable to my own. But, indeed, I might as well
have essayed to strike fire with my knuckles against a bit of Windsor
soap. But one afternoon the evil impulse in me mastered me, and the
following little scene ensued:

“Bartleby,” said I, “when those papers are all copied, I will compare
them with you.”

“I would prefer not to.”

“How? Surely you do not mean to persist in that mulish vagary?”

No answer.

I threw open the folding-doors near by, and, turning upon Turkey and
Nippers, exclaimed:

“Bartleby a second time says, he won’t examine his papers. What do you
think of it, Turkey?”

It was afternoon, be it remembered. Turkey sat glowing like a brass
boiler; his bald head steaming; his hands reeling among his blotted
papers.

“Think of it?” roared Turkey; “I think I’ll just step behind his
screen, and black his eyes for him!”

So saying, Turkey rose to his feet and threw his arms into a pugilistic
position. He was hurrying away to make good his promise, when I
detained him, alarmed at the effect of incautiously rousing Turkey’s
combativeness after dinner.

“Sit down, Turkey,” said I, “and hear what Nippers has to say. What do
you think of it, Nippers? Would I not be justified in immediately
dismissing Bartleby?”

“Excuse me, that is for you to decide, sir. I think his conduct quite
unusual, and, indeed, unjust, as regards Turkey and myself. But it may
only be a passing whim.”

“Ah,” exclaimed I, “you have strangely changed your mind, then—you
speak very gently of him now.”

“All beer,” cried Turkey; “gentleness is effects of beer—Nippers and I
dined together to-day. You see how gentle _I_ am, sir. Shall I go and
black his eyes?”

“You refer to Bartleby, I suppose. No, not to-day, Turkey,” I replied;
“pray, put up your fists.”

I closed the doors, and again advanced towards Bartleby. I felt
additional incentives tempting me to my fate. I burned to be rebelled
against again. I remembered that Bartleby never left the office.

“Bartleby,” said I, “Ginger Nut is away; just step around to the Post
Office, won’t you? (it was but a three minutes’ walk), and see if there
is anything for me.”

“I would prefer not to.”

“You _will_ not?”

“I _prefer_ not.”

I staggered to my desk, and sat there in a deep study. My blind
inveteracy returned. Was there any other thing in which I could procure
myself to be ignominiously repulsed by this lean, penniless wight?—my
hired clerk? What added thing is there, perfectly reasonable, that he
will be sure to refuse to do?

“Bartleby!”

No answer.

“Bartleby,” in a louder tone.

No answer.

“Bartleby,” I roared.

Like a very ghost, agreeably to the laws of magical invocation, at the
third summons, he appeared at the entrance of his hermitage.

“Go to the next room, and tell Nippers to come to me.”

“I prefer not to,” he respectfully and slowly said, and mildly
disappeared.

“Very good, Bartleby,” said I, in a quiet sort of serenely-severe
self-possessed tone, intimating the unalterable purpose of some
terrible retribution very close at hand. At the moment I half intended
something of the kind. But upon the whole, as it was drawing towards my
dinner-hour, I thought it best to put on my hat and walk home for the
day, suffering much from perplexity and distress of mind.

Shall I acknowledge it? The conclusion of this whole business was, that
it soon became a fixed fact of my chambers, that a pale young
scrivener, by the name of Bartleby, had a desk there; that he copied
for me at the usual rate of four cents a folio (one hundred words); but
he was permanently exempt from examining the work done by him, that
duty being transferred to Turkey and Nippers, out of compliment,
doubtless, to their superior acuteness; moreover, said Bartleby was
never, on any account, to be dispatched on the most trivial errand of
any sort; and that even if entreated to take upon him such a matter, it
was generally understood that he would “prefer not to”—in other words,
that he would refuse point-blank.

As days passed on, I became considerably reconciled to Bartleby. His
steadiness, his freedom from all dissipation, his incessant industry
(except when he chose to throw himself into a standing revery behind
his screen), his great stillness, his unalterableness of demeanor under
all circumstances, made him a valuable acquisition. One prime thing was
this—_he was always there_—first in the morning, continually through
the day, and the last at night. I had a singular confidence in his
honesty. I felt my most precious papers perfectly safe in his hands.
Sometimes, to be sure, I could not, for the very soul of me, avoid
falling into sudden spasmodic passions with him. For it was exceeding
difficult to bear in mind all the time those strange peculiarities,
privileges, and unheard of exemptions, forming the tacit stipulations
on Bartleby’s part under which he remained in my office. Now and then,
in the eagerness of dispatching pressing business, I would
inadvertently summon Bartleby, in a short, rapid tone, to put his
finger, say, on the incipient tie of a bit of red tape with which I was
about compressing some papers. Of course, from behind the screen the
usual answer, “I prefer not to,” was sure to come; and then, how could
a human creature, with the common infirmities of our nature, refrain
from bitterly exclaiming upon such perverseness—such unreasonableness.
However, every added repulse of this sort which I received only tended
to lessen the probability of my repeating the inadvertence.

Here it must be said, that according to the custom of most legal
gentlemen occupying chambers in densely-populated law buildings, there
were several keys to my door. One was kept by a woman residing in the
attic, which person weekly scrubbed and daily swept and dusted my
apartments. Another was kept by Turkey for convenience sake. The third
I sometimes carried in my own pocket. The fourth I knew not who had.

Now, one Sunday morning I happened to go to Trinity Church, to hear a
celebrated preacher, and finding myself rather early on the ground I
thought I would walk round to my chambers for a while. Luckily I had my
key with me; but upon applying it to the lock, I found it resisted by
something inserted from the inside. Quite surprised, I called out; when
to my consternation a key was turned from within; and thrusting his
lean visage at me, and holding the door ajar, the apparition of
Bartleby appeared, in his shirt sleeves, and otherwise in a strangely
tattered deshabille, saying quietly that he was sorry, but he was
deeply engaged just then, and—preferred not admitting me at present. In
a brief word or two, he moreover added, that perhaps I had better walk
round the block two or three times, and by that time he would probably
have concluded his affairs.

Now, the utterly unsurmised appearance of Bartleby, tenanting my
law-chambers of a Sunday morning, with his cadaverously gentlemanly
_nonchalance_, yet withal firm and self-possessed, had such a strange
effect upon me, that incontinently I slunk away from my own door, and
did as desired. But not without sundry twinges of impotent rebellion
against the mild effrontery of this unaccountable scrivener. Indeed, it
was his wonderful mildness chiefly, which not only disarmed me, but
unmanned me as it were. For I consider that one, for the time, is a
sort of unmanned when he tranquilly permits his hired clerk to dictate
to him, and order him away from his own premises. Furthermore, I was
full of uneasiness as to what Bartleby could possibly be doing in my
office in his shirt sleeves, and in an otherwise dismantled condition
of a Sunday morning. Was anything amiss going on? Nay, that was out of
the question. It was not to be thought of for a moment that Bartleby
was an immoral person. But what could he be doing there?—copying? Nay
again, whatever might be his eccentricities, Bartleby was an eminently
decorous person. He would be the last man to sit down to his desk in
any state approaching to nudity. Besides, it was Sunday; and there was
something about Bartleby that forbade the supposition that he would by
any secular occupation violate the proprieties of the day.

Nevertheless, my mind was not pacified; and full of a restless
curiosity, at last I returned to the door. Without hindrance I inserted
my key, opened it, and entered. Bartleby was not to be seen. I looked
round anxiously, peeped behind his screen; but it was very plain that
he was gone. Upon more closely examining the place, I surmised that for
an indefinite period Bartleby must have ate, dressed, and slept in my
office, and that, too without plate, mirror, or bed. The cushioned seat
of a ricketty old sofa in one corner bore the faint impress of a lean,
reclining form. Rolled away under his desk, I found a blanket; under
the empty grate, a blacking box and brush; on a chair, a tin basin,
with soap and a ragged towel; in a newspaper a few crumbs of
ginger-nuts and a morsel of cheese. Yes, thought I, it is evident
enough that Bartleby has been making his home here, keeping bachelor’s
hall all by himself. Immediately then the thought came sweeping across
me, what miserable friendlessness and loneliness are here revealed! His
poverty is great; but his solitude, how horrible! Think of it. Of a
Sunday, Wall-street is deserted as Petra; and every night of every day
it is an emptiness. This building, too, which of week-days hums with
industry and life, at nightfall echoes with sheer vacancy, and all
through Sunday is forlorn. And here Bartleby makes his home; sole
spectator, of a solitude which he has seen all populous—a sort of
innocent and transformed Marius brooding among the ruins of Carthage!

For the first time in my life a feeling of overpowering stinging
melancholy seized me. Before, I had never experienced aught but a not
unpleasing sadness. The bond of a common humanity now drew me
irresistibly to gloom. A fraternal melancholy! For both I and Bartleby
were sons of Adam. I remembered the bright silks and sparkling faces I
had seen that day, in gala trim, swan-like sailing down the Mississippi
of Broadway; and I contrasted them with the pallid copyist, and thought
to myself, Ah, happiness courts the light, so we deem the world is gay;
but misery hides aloof, so we deem that misery there is none. These sad
fancyings—chimeras, doubtless, of a sick and silly brain—led on to
other and more special thoughts, concerning the eccentricities of
Bartleby. Presentiments of strange discoveries hovered round me. The
scriveners pale form appeared to me laid out, among uncaring strangers,
in its shivering winding sheet.

Suddenly I was attracted by Bartleby’s closed desk, the key in open
sight left in the lock.

I mean no mischief, seek the gratification of no heartless curiosity,
thought I; besides, the desk is mine, and its contents, too, so I will
make bold to look within. Everything was methodically arranged, the
papers smoothly placed. The pigeon holes were deep, and removing the
files of documents, I groped into their recesses. Presently I felt
something there, and dragged it out. It was an old bandanna
handkerchief, heavy and knotted. I opened it, and saw it was a savings’
bank.

I now recalled all the quiet mysteries which I had noted in the man. I
remembered that he never spoke but to answer; that, though at intervals
he had considerable time to himself, yet I had never seen him
reading—no, not even a newspaper; that for long periods he would stand
looking out, at his pale window behind the screen, upon the dead brick
wall; I was quite sure he never visited any refectory or eating house;
while his pale face clearly indicated that he never drank beer like
Turkey, or tea and coffee even, like other men; that he never went
anywhere in particular that I could learn; never went out for a walk,
unless, indeed, that was the case at present; that he had declined
telling who he was, or whence he came, or whether he had any relatives
in the world; that though so thin and pale, he never complained of ill
health. And more than all, I remembered a certain unconscious air of
pallid—how shall I call it?—of pallid haughtiness, say, or rather an
austere reserve about him, which had positively awed me into my tame
compliance with his eccentricities, when I had feared to ask him to do
the slightest incidental thing for me, even though I might know, from
his long-continued motionlessness, that behind his screen he must be
standing in one of those dead-wall reveries of his.

Revolving all these things, and coupling them with the recently
discovered fact, that he made my office his constant abiding place and
home, and not forgetful of his morbid moodiness; revolving all these
things, a prudential feeling began to steal over me. My first emotions
had been those of pure melancholy and sincerest pity; but just in
proportion as the forlornness of Bartleby grew and grew to my
imagination, did that same melancholy merge into fear, that pity into
repulsion. So true it is, and so terrible, too, that up to a certain
point the thought or sight of misery enlists our best affections; but,
in certain special cases, beyond that point it does not. They err who
would assert that invariably this is owing to the inherent selfishness
of the human heart. It rather proceeds from a certain hopelessness of
remedying excessive and organic ill. To a sensitive being, pity is not
seldom pain. And when at last it is perceived that such pity cannot
lead to effectual succor, common sense bids the soul be rid of it. What
I saw that morning persuaded me that the scrivener was the victim of
innate and incurable disorder. I might give alms to his body; but his
body did not pain him; it was his soul that suffered, and his soul I
could not reach.

I did not accomplish the purpose of going to Trinity Church that
morning. Somehow, the things I had seen disqualified me for the time
from church-going. I walked homeward, thinking what I would do with
Bartleby. Finally, I resolved upon this—I would put certain calm
questions to him the next morning, touching his history, etc., and if
he declined to answer them openly and unreservedly (and I supposed he
would prefer not), then to give him a twenty dollar bill over and above
whatever I might owe him, and tell him his services were no longer
required; but that if in any other way I could assist him, I would be
happy to do so, especially if he desired to return to his native place,
wherever that might be, I would willingly help to defray the expenses.
Moreover, if, after reaching home, he found himself at any time in want
of aid, a letter from him would be sure of a reply.

The next morning came.

“Bartleby,” said I, gently calling to him behind his screen.

No reply.

“Bartleby,” said I, in a still gentler tone, “come here; I am not going
to ask you to do anything you would prefer not to do—I simply wish to
speak to you.”

Upon this he noiselessly slid into view.

“Will you tell me, Bartleby, where you were born?”

“I would prefer not to.”

“Will you tell me _anything_ about yourself?”

“I would prefer not to.”

“But what reasonable objection can you have to speak to me? I feel
friendly towards you.”

He did not look at me while I spoke, but kept his glance fixed upon my
bust of Cicero, which, as I then sat, was directly behind me, some six
inches above my head.

“What is your answer, Bartleby,” said I, after waiting a considerable
time for a reply, during which his countenance remained immovable, only
there was the faintest conceivable tremor of the white attenuated
mouth.

“At present I prefer to give no answer,” he said, and retired into his
hermitage.

It was rather weak in me I confess, but his manner, on this occasion,
nettled me. Not only did there seem to lurk in it a certain calm
disdain, but his perverseness seemed ungrateful, considering the
undeniable good usage and indulgence he had received from me.

Again I sat ruminating what I should do. Mortified as I was at his
behavior, and resolved as I had been to dismiss him when I entered my
office, nevertheless I strangely felt something superstitious knocking
at my heart, and forbidding me to carry out my purpose, and denouncing
me for a villain if I dared to breathe one bitter word against this
forlornest of mankind. At last, familiarly drawing my chair behind his
screen, I sat down and said: “Bartleby, never mind, then, about
revealing your history; but let me entreat you, as a friend, to comply
as far as may be with the usages of this office. Say now, you will help
to examine papers to-morrow or next day: in short, say now, that in a
day or two you will begin to be a little reasonable:—say so, Bartleby.”

“At present I would prefer not to be a little reasonable,” was his
mildly cadaverous reply.

Just then the folding-doors opened, and Nippers approached. He seemed
suffering from an unusually bad night’s rest, induced by severer
indigestion than common. He overheard those final words of Bartleby.

“_Prefer not_, eh?” gritted Nippers—“I’d _prefer_ him, if I were you,
sir,” addressing me—“I’d _prefer_ him; I’d give him preferences, the
stubborn mule! What is it, sir, pray, that he _prefers_ not to do now?”

Bartleby moved not a limb.

“Mr. Nippers,” said I, “I’d prefer that you would withdraw for the
present.”

Somehow, of late, I had got into the way of involuntarily using this
word “prefer” upon all sorts of not exactly suitable occasions. And I
trembled to think that my contact with the scrivener had already and
seriously affected me in a mental way. And what further and deeper
aberration might it not yet produce? This apprehension had not been
without efficacy in determining me to summary measures.

As Nippers, looking very sour and sulky, was departing, Turkey blandly
and deferentially approached.

“With submission, sir,” said he, “yesterday I was thinking about
Bartleby here, and I think that if he would but prefer to take a quart
of good ale every day, it would do much towards mending him, and
enabling him to assist in examining his papers.”

“So you have got the word, too,” said I, slightly excited.

“With submission, what word, sir,” asked Turkey, respectfully crowding
himself into the contracted space behind the screen, and by so doing,
making me jostle the scrivener. “What word, sir?”

“I would prefer to be left alone here,” said Bartleby, as if offended
at being mobbed in his privacy.

“_That’s_ the word, Turkey,” said I—“_that’s_ it.”

“Oh, _prefer_? oh yes—queer word. I never use it myself. But, sir, as I
was saying, if he would but prefer—”

“Turkey,” interrupted I, “you will please withdraw.”

“Oh certainly, sir, if you prefer that I should.”

As he opened the folding-door to retire, Nippers at his desk caught a
glimpse of me, and asked whether I would prefer to have a certain paper
copied on blue paper or white. He did not in the least roguishly accent
the word prefer. It was plain that it involuntarily rolled from his
tongue. I thought to myself, surely I must get rid of a demented man,
who already has in some degree turned the tongues, if not the heads of
myself and clerks. But I thought it prudent not to break the dismission
at once.

The next day I noticed that Bartleby did nothing but stand at his
window in his dead-wall revery. Upon asking him why he did not write,
he said that he had decided upon doing no more writing.

“Why, how now? what next?” exclaimed I, “do no more writing?”

“No more.”

“And what is the reason?”

“Do you not see the reason for yourself,” he indifferently replied.

I looked steadfastly at him, and perceived that his eyes looked dull
and glazed. Instantly it occurred to me, that his unexampled diligence
in copying by his dim window for the first few weeks of his stay with
me might have temporarily impared his vision.

I was touched. I said something in condolence with him. I hinted that
of course he did wisely in abstaining from writing for a while; and
urged him to embrace that opportunity of taking wholesome exercise in
the open air. This, however, he did not do. A few days after this, my
other clerks being absent, and being in a great hurry to dispatch
certain letters by the mail, I thought that, having nothing else
earthly to do, Bartleby would surely be less inflexible than usual, and
carry these letters to the post-office. But he blankly declined. So,
much to my inconvenience, I went myself.

Still added days went by. Whether Bartleby’s eyes improved or not, I
could not say. To all appearance, I thought they did. But when I asked
him if they did, he vouchsafed no answer. At all events, he would do no
copying. At last, in reply to my urgings, he informed me that he had
permanently given up copying.

“What!” exclaimed I; “suppose your eyes should get entirely well—better
than ever before—would you not copy then?”

“I have given up copying,” he answered, and slid aside.

He remained as ever, a fixture in my chamber. Nay—if that were
possible—he became still more of a fixture than before. What was to be
done? He would do nothing in the office; why should he stay there? In
plain fact, he had now become a millstone to me, not only useless as a
necklace, but afflictive to bear. Yet I was sorry for him. I speak less
than truth when I say that, on his own account, he occasioned me
uneasiness. If he would but have named a single relative or friend, I
would instantly have written, and urged their taking the poor fellow
away to some convenient retreat. But he seemed alone, absolutely alone
in the universe. A bit of wreck in the mid Atlantic. At length,
necessities connected with my business tyrannized over all other
considerations. Decently as I could, I told Bartleby that in six days
time he must unconditionally leave the office. I warned him to take
measures, in the interval, for procuring some other abode. I offered to
assist him in this endeavor, if he himself would but take the first
step towards a removal. “And when you finally quit me, Bartleby,” added
I, “I shall see that you go not away entirely unprovided. Six days from
this hour, remember.”

At the expiration of that period, I peeped behind the screen, and lo!
Bartleby was there.

I buttoned up my coat, balanced myself; advanced slowly towards him,
touched his shoulder, and said, “The time has come; you must quit this
place; I am sorry for you; here is money; but you must go.”

“I would prefer not,” he replied, with his back still towards me.

“You _must_.”

He remained silent.

Now I had an unbounded confidence in this man’s common honesty. He had
frequently restored to me sixpences and shillings carelessly dropped
upon the floor, for I am apt to be very reckless in such shirt-button
affairs. The proceeding, then, which followed will not be deemed
extraordinary.

“Bartleby,” said I, “I owe you twelve dollars on account; here are
thirty-two; the odd twenty are yours—Will you take it?” and I handed
the bills towards him.

But he made no motion.

“I will leave them here, then,” putting them under a weight on the
table. Then taking my hat and cane and going to the door, I tranquilly
turned and added—“After you have removed your things from these
offices, Bartleby, you will of course lock the door—since every one is
now gone for the day but you—and if you please, slip your key
underneath the mat, so that I may have it in the morning. I shall not
see you again; so good-by to you. If, hereafter, in your new place of
abode, I can be of any service to you, do not fail to advise me by
letter. Good-by, Bartleby, and fare you well.”

But he answered not a word; like the last column of some ruined temple,
he remained standing mute and solitary in the middle of the otherwise
deserted room.

As I walked home in a pensive mood, my vanity got the better of my
pity. I could not but highly plume myself on my masterly management in
getting rid of Bartleby. Masterly I call it, and such it must appear to
any dispassionate thinker. The beauty of my procedure seemed to consist
in its perfect quietness. There was no vulgar bullying, no bravado of
any sort, no choleric hectoring, and striding to and fro across the
apartment, jerking out vehement commands for Bartleby to bundle himself
off with his beggarly traps. Nothing of the kind. Without loudly
bidding Bartleby depart—as an inferior genius might have done—I
_assumed_ the ground that depart he must; and upon that assumption
built all I had to say. The more I thought over my procedure, the more
I was charmed with it. Nevertheless, next morning, upon awakening, I
had my doubts—I had somehow slept off the fumes of vanity. One of the
coolest and wisest hours a man has, is just after he awakes in the
morning. My procedure seemed as sagacious as ever—but only in theory.
How it would prove in practice—there was the rub. It was truly a
beautiful thought to have assumed Bartleby’s departure; but, after all,
that assumption was simply my own, and none of Bartleby’s. The great
point was, not whether I had assumed that he would quit me, but whether
he would prefer so to do. He was more a man of preferences than
assumptions.

After breakfast, I walked down town, arguing the probabilities _pro_
and _con_. One moment I thought it would prove a miserable failure, and
Bartleby would be found all alive at my office as usual; the next
moment it seemed certain that I should find his chair empty. And so I
kept veering about. At the corner of Broadway and Canal street, I saw
quite an excited group of people standing in earnest conversation.

“I’ll take odds he doesn’t,” said a voice as I passed.

“Doesn’t go?—done!” said I, “put up your money.”

I was instinctively putting my hand in my pocket to produce my own,
when I remembered that this was an election day. The words I had
overheard bore no reference to Bartleby, but to the success or
non-success of some candidate for the mayoralty. In my intent frame of
mind, I had, as it were, imagined that all Broadway shared in my
excitement, and were debating the same question with me. I passed on,
very thankful that the uproar of the street screened my momentary
absent-mindedness.

As I had intended, I was earlier than usual at my office door. I stood
listening for a moment. All was still. He must be gone. I tried the
knob. The door was locked. Yes, my procedure had worked to a charm; he
indeed must be vanished. Yet a certain melancholy mixed with this: I
was almost sorry for my brilliant success. I was fumbling under the
door mat for the key, which Bartleby was to have left there for me,
when accidentally my knee knocked against a panel, producing a
summoning sound, and in response a voice came to me from within—“Not
yet; I am occupied.”

It was Bartleby.

I was thunderstruck. For an instant I stood like the man who, pipe in
mouth, was killed one cloudless afternoon long ago in Virginia, by
summer lightning; at his own warm open window he was killed, and
remained leaning out there upon the dreamy afternoon till some one
touched him, when he fell.

“Not gone!” I murmured at last. But again obeying that wondrous
ascendancy which the inscrutable scrivener had over me, and from which
ascendancy, for all my chafing, I could not completely escape, I slowly
went down stairs and out into the street, and while walking round the
block, considered what I should next do in this unheard-of perplexity.
Turn the man out by an actual thrusting I could not; to drive him away
by calling him hard names would not do; calling in the police was an
unpleasant idea; and yet, permit him to enjoy his cadaverous triumph
over me—this, too, I could not think of. What was to be done? or, if
nothing could be done, was there anything further that I could _assume_
in the matter? Yes, as before I had prospectively assumed that Bartleby
would depart, so now I might retrospectively assume that departed he
was. In the legitimate carrying out of this assumption, I might enter
my office in a great hurry, and pretending not to see Bartleby at all,
walk straight against him as if he were air. Such a proceeding would in
a singular degree have the appearance of a home-thrust. It was hardly
possible that Bartleby could withstand such an application of the
doctrine of assumptions. But upon second thoughts the success of the
plan seemed rather dubious. I resolved to argue the matter over with
him again.

“Bartleby,” said I, entering the office, with a quietly severe
expression, “I am seriously displeased. I am pained, Bartleby. I had
thought better of you. I had imagined you of such a gentlemanly
organization, that in any delicate dilemma a slight hint would
suffice—in short, an assumption. But it appears I am deceived. Why,” I
added, unaffectedly starting, “you have not even touched that money
yet,” pointing to it, just where I had left it the evening previous.

He answered nothing.

“Will you, or will you not, quit me?” I now demanded in a sudden
passion, advancing close to him.

“I would prefer _not_ to quit you,” he replied gently emphasizing the
_not_.

“What earthly right have you to stay here? Do you pay any rent? Do you
pay my taxes? Or is this property yours?”

He answered nothing.

“Are you ready to go on and write now? Are your eyes recovered? Could
you copy a small paper for me this morning? or help examine a few
lines? or step round to the post-office? In a word, will you do
anything at all, to give a coloring to your refusal to depart the
premises?”

He silently retired into his hermitage.

I was now in such a state of nervous resentment that I thought it but
prudent to check myself at present from further demonstrations.
Bartleby and I were alone. I remembered the tragedy of the unfortunate
Adams and the still more unfortunate Colt in the solitary office of the
latter; and how poor Colt, being dreadfully incensed by Adams, and
imprudently permitting himself to get wildly excited, was at unawares
hurried into his fatal act—an act which certainly no man could possibly
deplore more than the actor himself. Often it had occurred to me in my
ponderings upon the subject, that had that altercation taken place in
the public street, or at a private residence, it would not have
terminated as it did. It was the circumstance of being alone in a
solitary office, up stairs, of a building entirely unhallowed by
humanizing domestic associations—an uncarpeted office, doubtless, of a
dusty, haggard sort of appearance—this it must have been, which greatly
helped to enhance the irritable desperation of the hapless Colt.

But when this old Adam of resentment rose in me and tempted me
concerning Bartleby, I grappled him and threw him. How? Why, simply by
recalling the divine injunction: “A new commandment give I unto you,
that ye love one another.” Yes, this it was that saved me. Aside from
higher considerations, charity often operates as a vastly wise and
prudent principle—a great safeguard to its possessor. Men have
committed murder for jealousy’s sake, and anger’s sake, and hatred’s
sake, and selfishness’ sake, and spiritual pride’s sake; but no man,
that ever I heard of, ever committed a diabolical murder for sweet
charity’s sake. Mere self-interest, then, if no better motive can be
enlisted, should, especially with high-tempered men, prompt all beings
to charity and philanthropy. At any rate, upon the occasion in
question, I strove to drown my exasperated feelings towards the
scrivener by benevolently construing his conduct.—Poor fellow, poor
fellow! thought I, he don’t mean anything; and besides, he has seen
hard times, and ought to be indulged.

I endeavored, also, immediately to occupy myself, and at the same time
to comfort my despondency. I tried to fancy, that in the course of the
morning, at such time as might prove agreeable to him, Bartleby, of his
own free accord, would emerge from his hermitage and take up some
decided line of march in the direction of the door. But no. Half-past
twelve o’clock came; Turkey began to glow in the face, overturn his
inkstand, and become generally obstreperous; Nippers abated down into
quietude and courtesy; Ginger Nut munched his noon apple; and Bartleby
remained standing at his window in one of his profoundest dead-wall
reveries. Will it be credited? Ought I to acknowledge it? That
afternoon I left the office without saying one further word to him.

Some days now passed, during which, at leisure intervals I looked a
little into “Edwards on the Will,” and “Priestley on Necessity.” Under
the circumstances, those books induced a salutary feeling. Gradually I
slid into the persuasion that these troubles of mine, touching the
scrivener, had been all predestinated from eternity, and Bartleby was
billeted upon me for some mysterious purpose of an allwise Providence,
which it was not for a mere mortal like me to fathom. Yes, Bartleby,
stay there behind your screen, thought I; I shall persecute you no
more; you are harmless and noiseless as any of these old chairs; in
short, I never feel so private as when I know you are here. At last I
see it, I feel it; I penetrate to the predestinated purpose of my life.
I am content. Others may have loftier parts to enact; but my mission in
this world, Bartleby, is to furnish you with office-room for such
period as you may see fit to remain.

I believe that this wise and blessed frame of mind would have continued
with me, had it not been for the unsolicited and uncharitable remarks
obtruded upon me by my professional friends who visited the rooms. But
thus it often is, that the constant friction of illiberal minds wears
out at last the best resolves of the more generous. Though to be sure,
when I reflected upon it, it was not strange that people entering my
office should be struck by the peculiar aspect of the unaccountable
Bartleby, and so be tempted to throw out some sinister observations
concerning him. Sometimes an attorney, having business with me, and
calling at my office, and finding no one but the scrivener there, would
undertake to obtain some sort of precise information from him touching
my whereabouts; but without heeding his idle talk, Bartleby would
remain standing immovable in the middle of the room. So after
contemplating him in that position for a time, the attorney would
depart, no wiser than he came.

Also, when a reference was going on, and the room full of lawyers and
witnesses, and business driving fast, some deeply-occupied legal
gentleman present, seeing Bartleby wholly unemployed, would request him
to run round to his (the legal gentleman’s) office and fetch some
papers for him. Thereupon, Bartleby would tranquilly decline, and yet
remain idle as before. Then the lawyer would give a great stare, and
turn to me. And what could I say? At last I was made aware that all
through the circle of my professional acquaintance, a whisper of wonder
was running round, having reference to the strange creature I kept at
my office. This worried me very much. And as the idea came upon me of
his possibly turning out a long-lived man, and keep occupying my
chambers, and denying my authority; and perplexing my visitors; and
scandalizing my professional reputation; and casting a general gloom
over the premises; keeping soul and body together to the last upon his
savings (for doubtless he spent but half a dime a day), and in the end
perhaps outlive me, and claim possession of my office by right of his
perpetual occupancy: as all these dark anticipations crowded upon me
more and more, and my friends continually intruded their relentless
remarks upon the apparition in my room; a great change was wrought in
me. I resolved to gather all my faculties together, and forever rid me
of this intolerable incubus.

Ere revolving any complicated project, however, adapted to this end, I
first simply suggested to Bartleby the propriety of his permanent
departure. In a calm and serious tone, I commanded the idea to his
careful and mature consideration. But, having taken three days to
meditate upon it, he apprised me, that his original determination
remained the same; in short, that he still preferred to abide with me.

What shall I do? I now said to myself, buttoning up my coat to the last
button. What shall I do? what ought I to do? what does conscience say I
_should_ do with this man, or, rather, ghost. Rid myself of him, I
must; go, he shall. But how? You will not thrust him, the poor, pale,
passive mortal—you will not thrust such a helpless creature out of your
door? you will not dishonor yourself by such cruelty? No, I will not, I
cannot do that. Rather would I let him live and die here, and then
mason up his remains in the wall. What, then, will you do? For all your
coaxing, he will not budge. Bribes he leaves under your own
paper-weight on your table; in short, it is quite plain that he prefers
to cling to you.

Then something severe, something unusual must be done. What! surely you
will not have him collared by a constable, and commit his innocent
pallor to the common jail? And upon what ground could you procure such
a thing to be done?—a vagrant, is he? What! he a vagrant, a wanderer,
who refuses to budge? It is because he will _not_ be a vagrant, then,
that you seek to count him _as_ a vagrant. That is too absurd. No
visible means of support: there I have him. Wrong again: for
indubitably he _does_ support himself, and that is the only
unanswerable proof that any man can show of his possessing the means so
to do. No more, then. Since he will not quit me, I must quit him. I
will change my offices; I will move elsewhere, and give him fair
notice, that if I find him on my new premises I will then proceed
against him as a common trespasser.

Acting accordingly, next day I thus addressed him: “I find these
chambers too far from the City Hall; the air is unwholesome. In a word,
I propose to remove my offices next week, and shall no longer require
your services. I tell you this now, in order that you may seek another
place.”

He made no reply, and nothing more was said.

On the appointed day I engaged carts and men, proceeded to my chambers,
and, having but little furniture, everything was removed in a few
hours. Throughout, the scrivener remained standing behind the screen,
which I directed to be removed the last thing. It was withdrawn; and,
being folded up like a huge folio, left him the motionless occupant of
a naked room. I stood in the entry watching him a moment, while
something from within me upbraided me.

I re-entered, with my hand in my pocket—and—and my heart in my mouth.

“Good-by, Bartleby; I am going—good-by, and God some way bless you; and
take that,” slipping something in his hand. But it dropped upon the
floor, and then—strange to say—I tore myself from him whom I had so
longed to be rid of.

Established in my new quarters, for a day or two I kept the door
locked, and started at every footfall in the passages. When I returned
to my rooms, after any little absence, I would pause at the threshold
for an instant, and attentively listen, ere applying my key. But these
fears were needless. Bartleby never came nigh me.

I thought all was going well, when a perturbed-looking stranger visited
me, inquiring whether I was the person who had recently occupied rooms
at No. —— Wall street.

Full of forebodings, I replied that I was.

“Then, sir,” said the stranger, who proved a lawyer, “you are
responsible for the man you left there. He refuses to do any copying;
he refuses to do anything; he says he prefers not to; and he refuses to
quit the premises.”

“I am very sorry, sir,” said I, with assumed tranquillity, but an
inward tremor, “but, really, the man you allude to is nothing to me—he
is no relation or apprentice of mine, that you should hold me
responsible for him.”

“In mercy’s name, who is he?”

“I certainly cannot inform you. I know nothing about him. Formerly I
employed him as a copyist; but he has done nothing for me now for some
time past.”

“I shall settle him, then—good morning, sir.”

Several days passed, and I heard nothing more; and, though I often felt
a charitable prompting to call at the place and see poor Bartleby, yet
a certain squeamishness, of I know not what, withheld me.

All is over with him, by this time, thought I, at last, when, through
another week, no further intelligence reached me. But, coming to my
room the day after, I found several persons waiting at my door in a
high state of nervous excitement.

“That’s the man—here he comes,” cried the foremost one, whom I
recognized as the lawyer who had previously called upon me alone.

“You must take him away, sir, at once,” cried a portly person among
them, advancing upon me, and whom I knew to be the landlord of No. ——
Wall street. “These gentlemen, my tenants, cannot stand it any longer;
Mr. B——,” pointing to the lawyer, “has turned him out of his room, and
he now persists in haunting the building generally, sitting upon the
banisters of the stairs by day, and sleeping in the entry by night.
Everybody is concerned; clients are leaving the offices; some fears are
entertained of a mob; something you must do, and that without delay.”

Aghast at this torrent, I fell back before it, and would fain have
locked myself in my new quarters. In vain I persisted that Bartleby was
nothing to me—no more than to any one else. In vain—I was the last
person known to have anything to do with him, and they held me to the
terrible account. Fearful, then, of being exposed in the papers (as one
person present obscurely threatened), I considered the matter, and, at
length, said, that if the lawyer would give me a confidential interview
with the scrivener, in his (the lawyer’s) own room, I would, that
afternoon, strive my best to rid them of the nuisance they complained
of.

Going up stairs to my old haunt, there was Bartleby silently sitting
upon the banister at the landing.

“What are you doing here, Bartleby?” said I.

“Sitting upon the banister,” he mildly replied.

I motioned him into the lawyer’s room, who then left us.

“Bartleby” said I, “are you aware that you are the cause of great
tribulation to me, by persisting in occupying the entry after being
dismissed from the office?”

No answer.

“Now one of two things must take place. Either you must do something,
or something must be done to you. Now what sort of business would you
like to engage in? Would you like to re-engage in copying for some
one?”

“No; I would prefer not to make any change.”

“Would you like a clerkship in a dry-goods store?”

“There is too much confinement about that. No, I would not like a
clerkship; but I am not particular.”

“Too much confinement,” I cried, “why you keep yourself confined all
the time!”

“I would prefer not to take a clerkship,” he rejoined, as if to settle
that little item at once.

“How would a bar-tender’s business suit you? There is no trying of the
eye-sight in that.”

“I would not like it at all; though, as I said before, I am not
particular.”

His unwonted wordiness inspirited me. I returned to the charge.

“Well, then, would you like to travel through the country collecting
bills for the merchants? That would improve your health.”

“No, I would prefer to be doing something else.”

“How, then, would going as a companion to Europe, to entertain some
young gentleman with your conversation—how would that suit you?”

“Not at all. It does not strike me that there is anything definite
about that. I like to be stationary. But I am not particular.”

“Stationary you shall be, then,” I cried, now losing all patience, and,
for the first time in all my exasperating connection with him, fairly
flying into a passion. “If you do not go away from these premises
before night, I shall feel bound—indeed, I _am_ bound—to—to—to quit the
premises myself!” I rather absurdly concluded, knowing not with what
possible threat to try to frighten his immobility into compliance.
Despairing of all further efforts, I was precipitately leaving him,
when a final thought occurred to me—one which had not been wholly
unindulged before.

“Bartleby,” said I, in the kindest tone I could assume under such
exciting circumstances, “will you go home with me now—not to my office,
but my dwelling—and remain there till we can conclude upon some
convenient arrangement for you at our leisure? Come, let us start now,
right away.”

“No: at present I would prefer not to make any change at all.”

I answered nothing; but, effectually dodging every one by the
suddenness and rapidity of my flight, rushed from the building, ran up
Wall street towards Broadway, and, jumping into the first omnibus, was
soon removed from pursuit. As soon as tranquillity returned, I
distinctly perceived that I had now done all that I possibly could,
both in respect to the demands of the landlord and his tenants, and
with regard to my own desire and sense of duty, to benefit Bartleby,
and shield him from rude persecution, I now strove to be entirely
care-free and quiescent; and my conscience justified me in the attempt;
though, indeed, it was not so successful as I could have wished. So
fearful was I of being again hunted out by the incensed landlord and
his exasperated tenants, that, surrendering my business to Nippers, for
a few days, I drove about the upper part of the town and through the
suburbs, in my rockaway; crossed over to Jersey City and Hoboken, and
paid fugitive visits to Manhattanville and Astoria. In fact, I almost
lived in my rockaway for the time.

When again I entered my office, lo, a note from the landlord lay upon
the desk. I opened it with trembling hands. It informed me that the
writer had sent to the police, and had Bartleby removed to the Tombs as
a vagrant. Moreover, since I knew more about him than any one else, he
wished me to appear at that place, and make a suitable statement of the
facts. These tidings had a conflicting effect upon me. At first I was
indignant; but, at last, almost approved. The landlord’s energetic,
summary disposition, had led him to adopt a procedure which I do not
think I would have decided upon myself; and yet, as a last resort,
under such peculiar circumstances, it seemed the only plan.

As I afterwards learned, the poor scrivener, when told that he must be
conducted to the Tombs, offered not the slightest obstacle, but, in his
pale, unmoving way, silently acquiesced.

Some of the compassionate and curious bystanders joined the party; and
headed by one of the constables arm in arm with Bartleby, the silent
procession filed its way through all the noise, and heat, and joy of
the roaring thoroughfares at noon.

The same day I received the note, I went to the Tombs, or, to speak
more properly, the Halls of Justice. Seeking the right officer, I
stated the purpose of my call, and was informed that the individual I
described was, indeed, within. I then assured the functionary that
Bartleby was a perfectly honest man, and greatly to be compassionated,
however unaccountably eccentric. I narrated all I knew and closed by
suggesting the idea of letting him remain in as indulgent confinement
as possible, till something less harsh might be done—though, indeed, I
hardly knew what. At all events, if nothing else could be decided upon,
the alms-house must receive him. I then begged to have an interview.

Being under no disgraceful charge, and quite serene and harmless in all
his ways, they had permitted him freely to wander about the prison,
and, especially, in the inclosed grass-platted yards thereof. And so I
found him there, standing all alone in the quietest of the yards, his
face towards a high wall, while all around, from the narrow slits of
the jail windows, I thought I saw peering out upon him the eyes of
murderers and thieves.

“Bartleby!”

“I know you,” he said, without looking round—“and I want nothing to say
to you.”

“It was not I that brought you here, Bartleby,” said I, keenly pained
at his implied suspicion. “And to you, this should not be so vile a
place. Nothing reproachful attaches to you by being here. And see, it
is not so sad a place as one might think. Look, there is the sky, and
here is the grass.”

“I know where I am,” he replied, but would say nothing more, and so I
left him.

As I entered the corridor again, a broad meat-like man, in an apron,
accosted me, and, jerking his thumb over his shoulder, said—“Is that
your friend?”

“Yes.”

“Does he want to starve? If he does, let him live on the prison fare,
that’s all.”

“Who are you?” asked I, not knowing what to make of such an
unofficially speaking person in such a place.

“I am the grub-man. Such gentlemen as have friends here, hire me to
provide them with something good to eat.”

“Is this so?” said I, turning to the turnkey.

He said it was.

“Well, then,” said I, slipping some silver into the grub-man’s hands
(for so they called him), “I want you to give particular attention to
my friend there; let him have the best dinner you can get. And you must
be as polite to him as possible.”

“Introduce me, will you?” said the grub-man, looking at me with an
expression which seem to say he was all impatience for an opportunity
to give a specimen of his breeding.

Thinking it would prove of benefit to the scrivener, I acquiesced; and,
asking the grub-man his name, went up with him to Bartleby.

“Bartleby, this is a friend; you will find him very useful to you.”

“Your sarvant, sir, your sarvant,” said the grub-man, making a low
salutation behind his apron. “Hope you find it pleasant here, sir; nice
grounds—cool apartments—hope you’ll stay with us some time—try to make
it agreeable. What will you have for dinner to-day?”

“I prefer not to dine to-day,” said Bartleby, turning away. “It would
disagree with me; I am unused to dinners.” So saying, he slowly moved
to the other side of the inclosure, and took up a position fronting the
dead-wall.

“How’s this?” said the grub-man, addressing me with a stare of
astonishment. “He’s odd, ain’t he?”

“I think he is a little deranged,” said I, sadly.

“Deranged? deranged is it? Well, now, upon my word, I thought that
friend of yourn was a gentleman forger; they are always pale, and
genteel-like, them forgers. I can’t help pity ’em—can’t help it, sir.
Did you know Monroe Edwards?” he added, touchingly, and paused. Then,
laying his hand piteously on my shoulder, sighed, “he died of
consumption at Sing-Sing. So you weren’t acquainted with Monroe?”

“No, I was never socially acquainted with any forgers. But I cannot
stop longer. Look to my friend yonder. You will not lose by it. I will
see you again.”

Some few days after this, I again obtained admission to the Tombs, and
went through the corridors in quest of Bartleby; but without finding
him.

“I saw him coming from his cell not long ago,” said a turnkey, “may be
he’s gone to loiter in the yards.”

So I went in that direction.

“Are you looking for the silent man?” said another turnkey, passing me.
“Yonder he lies—sleeping in the yard there. ’Tis not twenty minutes
since I saw him lie down.”

The yard was entirely quiet. It was not accessible to the common
prisoners. The surrounding walls, of amazing thickness, kept off all
sounds behind them. The Egyptian character of the masonry weighed upon
me with its gloom. But a soft imprisoned turf grew under foot. The
heart of the eternal pyramids, it seemed, wherein, by some strange
magic, through the clefts, grass-seed, dropped by birds, had sprung.

Strangely huddled at the base of the wall, his knees drawn up, and
lying on his side, his head touching the cold stones, I saw the wasted
Bartleby. But nothing stirred. I paused; then went close up to him;
stooped over, and saw that his dim eyes were open; otherwise he seemed
profoundly sleeping. Something prompted me to touch him. I felt his
hand, when a tingling shiver ran up my arm and down my spine to my
feet.

The round face of the grub-man peered upon me now. “His dinner is
ready. Won’t he dine to-day, either? Or does he live without dining?”

“Lives without dining,” said I, and closed the eyes.

“Eh!—He’s asleep, ain’t he?”

“With kings and counselors,” murmured I.


There would seem little need for proceeding further in this history.
Imagination will readily supply the meagre recital of poor Bartleby’s
interment. But, ere parting with the reader, let me say, that if this
little narrative has sufficiently interested him, to awaken curiosity
as to who Bartleby was, and what manner of life he led prior to the
present narrator’s making his acquaintance, I can only reply, that in
such curiosity I fully share, but am wholly unable to gratify it. Yet
here I hardly know whether I should divulge one little item of rumor,
which came to my ear a few months after the scrivener’s decease. Upon
what basis it rested, I could never ascertain; and hence, how true it
is I cannot now tell. But, inasmuch as this vague report has not been
without a certain suggestive interest to me, however sad, it may prove
the same with some others; and so I will briefly mention it. The report
was this: that Bartleby had been a subordinate clerk in the Dead Letter
Office at Washington, from which he had been suddenly removed by a
change in the administration. When I think over this rumor, hardly can
I express the emotions which seize me. Dead letters! does it not sound
like dead men? Conceive a man by nature and misfortune prone to a
pallid hopelessness, can any business seem more fitted to heighten it
than that of continually handling these dead letters, and assorting
them for the flames? For by the cart-load they are annually burned.
Sometimes from out the folded paper the pale clerk takes a ring—the
finger it was meant for, perhaps, moulders in the grave; a bank-note
sent in swiftest charity—he whom it would relieve, nor eats nor hungers
any more; pardon for those who died despairing; hope for those who died
unhoping; good tidings for those who died stifled by unrelieved
calamities. On errands of life, these letters speed to death.

Ah, Bartleby! Ah, humanity!




BENITO CERENO.


In the year 1799, Captain Amasa Delano, of Duxbury, in Massachusetts,
commanding a large sealer and general trader, lay at anchor with a
valuable cargo, in the harbor of St. Maria—a small, desert, uninhabited
island toward the southern extremity of the long coast of Chili. There
he had touched for water.

On the second day, not long after dawn, while lying in his berth, his
mate came below, informing him that a strange sail was coming into the
bay. Ships were then not so plenty in those waters as now. He rose,
dressed, and went on deck.

The morning was one peculiar to that coast. Everything was mute and
calm; everything gray. The sea, though undulated into long roods of
swells, seemed fixed, and was sleeked at the surface like waved lead
that has cooled and set in the smelter’s mould. The sky seemed a gray
surtout. Flights of troubled gray fowl, kith and kin with flights of
troubled gray vapors among which they were mixed, skimmed low and
fitfully over the waters, as swallows over meadows before storms.
Shadows present, foreshadowing deeper shadows to come.

To Captain Delano’s surprise, the stranger, viewed through the glass,
showed no colors; though to do so upon entering a haven, however
uninhabited in its shores, where but a single other ship might be
lying, was the custom among peaceful seamen of all nations. Considering
the lawlessness and loneliness of the spot, and the sort of stories, at
that day, associated with those seas, Captain Delano’s surprise might
have deepened into some uneasiness had he not been a person of a
singularly undistrustful good-nature, not liable, except on
extraordinary and repeated incentives, and hardly then, to indulge in
personal alarms, any way involving the imputation of malign evil in
man. Whether, in view of what humanity is capable, such a trait
implies, along with a benevolent heart, more than ordinary quickness
and accuracy of intellectual perception, may be left to the wise to
determine.

But whatever misgivings might have obtruded on first seeing the
stranger, would almost, in any seaman’s mind, have been dissipated by
observing that, the ship, in navigating into the harbor, was drawing
too near the land; a sunken reef making out off her bow. This seemed to
prove her a stranger, indeed, not only to the sealer, but the island;
consequently, she could be no wonted freebooter on that ocean. With no
small interest, Captain Delano continued to watch her—a proceeding not
much facilitated by the vapors partly mantling the hull, through which
the far matin light from her cabin streamed equivocally enough; much
like the sun—by this time hemisphered on the rim of the horizon, and,
apparently, in company with the strange ship entering the harbor—which,
wimpled by the same low, creeping clouds, showed not unlike a Lima
intriguante’s one sinister eye peering across the Plaza from the Indian
loop-hole of her dusk _saya-y-manta._

It might have been but a deception of the vapors, but, the longer the
stranger was watched the more singular appeared her manoeuvres. Ere
long it seemed hard to decide whether she meant to come in or no—what
she wanted, or what she was about. The wind, which had breezed up a
little during the night, was now extremely light and baffling, which
the more increased the apparent uncertainty of her movements.
Surmising, at last, that it might be a ship in distress, Captain Delano
ordered his whale-boat to be dropped, and, much to the wary opposition
of his mate, prepared to board her, and, at the least, pilot her in. On
the night previous, a fishing-party of the seamen had gone a long
distance to some detached rocks out of sight from the sealer, and, an
hour or two before daybreak, had returned, having met with no small
success. Presuming that the stranger might have been long off
soundings, the good captain put several baskets of the fish, for
presents, into his boat, and so pulled away. From her continuing too
near the sunken reef, deeming her in danger, calling to his men, he
made all haste to apprise those on board of their situation. But, some
time ere the boat came up, the wind, light though it was, having
shifted, had headed the vessel off, as well as partly broken the vapors
from about her.

Upon gaining a less remote view, the ship, when made signally visible
on the verge of the leaden-hued swells, with the shreds of fog here and
there raggedly furring her, appeared like a white-washed monastery
after a thunder-storm, seen perched upon some dun cliff among the
Pyrenees. But it was no purely fanciful resemblance which now, for a
moment, almost led Captain Delano to think that nothing less than a
ship-load of monks was before him. Peering over the bulwarks were what
really seemed, in the hazy distance, throngs of dark cowls; while,
fitfully revealed through the open port-holes, other dark moving
figures were dimly descried, as of Black Friars pacing the cloisters.

Upon a still nigher approach, this appearance was modified, and the
true character of the vessel was plain—a Spanish merchantman of the
first class, carrying negro slaves, amongst other valuable freight,
from one colonial port to another. A very large, and, in its time, a
very fine vessel, such as in those days were at intervals encountered
along that main; sometimes superseded Acapulco treasure-ships, or
retired frigates of the Spanish king’s navy, which, like superannuated
Italian palaces, still, under a decline of masters, preserved signs of
former state.

As the whale-boat drew more and more nigh, the cause of the peculiar
pipe-clayed aspect of the stranger was seen in the slovenly neglect
pervading her. The spars, ropes, and great part of the bulwarks, looked
woolly, from long unacquaintance with the scraper, tar, and the brush.
Her keel seemed laid, her ribs put together, and she launched, from
Ezekiel’s Valley of Dry Bones.

In the present business in which she was engaged, the ship’s general
model and rig appeared to have undergone no material change from their
original warlike and Froissart pattern. However, no guns were seen.

The tops were large, and were railed about with what had once been
octagonal net-work, all now in sad disrepair. These tops hung overhead
like three ruinous aviaries, in one of which was seen, perched, on a
ratlin, a white noddy, a strange fowl, so called from its lethargic,
somnambulistic character, being frequently caught by hand at sea.
Battered and mouldy, the castellated forecastle seemed some ancient
turret, long ago taken by assault, and then left to decay. Toward the
stern, two high-raised quarter galleries—the balustrades here and there
covered with dry, tindery sea-moss—opening out from the unoccupied
state-cabin, whose dead-lights, for all the mild weather, were
hermetically closed and calked—these tenantless balconies hung over the
sea as if it were the grand Venetian canal. But the principal relic of
faded grandeur was the ample oval of the shield-like stern-piece,
intricately carved with the arms of Castile and Leon, medallioned about
by groups of mythological or symbolical devices; uppermost and central
of which was a dark satyr in a mask, holding his foot on the prostrate
neck of a writhing figure, likewise masked.

Whether the ship had a figure-head, or only a plain beak, was not quite
certain, owing to canvas wrapped about that part, either to protect it
while undergoing a re-furbishing, or else decently to hide its decay.
Rudely painted or chalked, as in a sailor freak, along the forward side
of a sort of pedestal below the canvas, was the sentence, “_Seguid
vuestro jefe_” (follow your leader); while upon the tarnished
headboards, near by, appeared, in stately capitals, once gilt, the
ship’s name, “SAN DOMINICK,” each letter streakingly corroded with
tricklings of copper-spike rust; while, like mourning weeds, dark
festoons of sea-grass slimily swept to and fro over the name, with
every hearse-like roll of the hull.

As, at last, the boat was hooked from the bow along toward the gangway
amidship, its keel, while yet some inches separated from the hull,
harshly grated as on a sunken coral reef. It proved a huge bunch of
conglobated barnacles adhering below the water to the side like a wen—a
token of baffling airs and long calms passed somewhere in those seas.

Climbing the side, the visitor was at once surrounded by a clamorous
throng of whites and blacks, but the latter outnumbering the former
more than could have been expected, negro transportation-ship as the
stranger in port was. But, in one language, and as with one voice, all
poured out a common tale of suffering; in which the negresses, of whom
there were not a few, exceeded the others in their dolorous vehemence.
The scurvy, together with the fever, had swept off a great part of
their number, more especially the Spaniards. Off Cape Horn they had
narrowly escaped shipwreck; then, for days together, they had lain
tranced without wind; their provisions were low; their water next to
none; their lips that moment were baked.

While Captain Delano was thus made the mark of all eager tongues, his
one eager glance took in all faces, with every other object about him.

Always upon first boarding a large and populous ship at sea, especially
a foreign one, with a nondescript crew such as Lascars or Manilla men,
the impression varies in a peculiar way from that produced by first
entering a strange house with strange inmates in a strange land. Both
house and ship—the one by its walls and blinds, the other by its high
bulwarks like ramparts—hoard from view their interiors till the last
moment: but in the case of the ship there is this addition; that the
living spectacle it contains, upon its sudden and complete disclosure,
has, in contrast with the blank ocean which zones it, something of the
effect of enchantment. The ship seems unreal; these strange costumes,
gestures, and faces, but a shadowy tableau just emerged from the deep,
which directly must receive back what it gave.

Perhaps it was some such influence, as above is attempted to be
described, which, in Captain Delano’s mind, heightened whatever, upon a
staid scrutiny, might have seemed unusual; especially the conspicuous
figures of four elderly grizzled negroes, their heads like black,
doddered willow tops, who, in venerable contrast to the tumult below
them, were couched, sphynx-like, one on the starboard cat-head, another
on the larboard, and the remaining pair face to face on the opposite
bulwarks above the main-chains. They each had bits of unstranded old
junk in their hands, and, with a sort of stoical self-content, were
picking the junk into oakum, a small heap of which lay by their sides.
They accompanied the task with a continuous, low, monotonous, chant;
droning and drilling away like so many gray-headed bag-pipers playing a
funeral march.

The quarter-deck rose into an ample elevated poop, upon the forward
verge of which, lifted, like the oakum-pickers, some eight feet above
the general throng, sat along in a row, separated by regular spaces,
the cross-legged figures of six other blacks; each with a rusty hatchet
in his hand, which, with a bit of brick and a rag, he was engaged like
a scullion in scouring; while between each two was a small stack of
hatchets, their rusted edges turned forward awaiting a like operation.
Though occasionally the four oakum-pickers would briefly address some
person or persons in the crowd below, yet the six hatchet-polishers
neither spoke to others, nor breathed a whisper among themselves, but
sat intent upon their task, except at intervals, when, with the
peculiar love in negroes of uniting industry with pastime, two and two
they sideways clashed their hatchets together, like cymbals, with a
barbarous din. All six, unlike the generality, had the raw aspect of
unsophisticated Africans.

But that first comprehensive glance which took in those ten figures,
with scores less conspicuous, rested but an instant upon them, as,
impatient of the hubbub of voices, the visitor turned in quest of
whomsoever it might be that commanded the ship.

But as if not unwilling to let nature make known her own case among his
suffering charge, or else in despair of restraining it for the time,
the Spanish captain, a gentlemanly, reserved-looking, and rather young
man to a stranger’s eye, dressed with singular richness, but bearing
plain traces of recent sleepless cares and disquietudes, stood
passively by, leaning against the main-mast, at one moment casting a
dreary, spiritless look upon his excited people, at the next an unhappy
glance toward his visitor. By his side stood a black of small stature,
in whose rude face, as occasionally, like a shepherd’s dog, he mutely
turned it up into the Spaniard’s, sorrow and affection were equally
blended.

Struggling through the throng, the American advanced to the Spaniard,
assuring him of his sympathies, and offering to render whatever
assistance might be in his power. To which the Spaniard returned for
the present but grave and ceremonious acknowledgments, his national
formality dusked by the saturnine mood of ill-health.

But losing no time in mere compliments, Captain Delano, returning to
the gangway, had his basket of fish brought up; and as the wind still
continued light, so that some hours at least must elapse ere the ship
could be brought to the anchorage, he bade his men return to the
sealer, and fetch back as much water as the whale-boat could carry,
with whatever soft bread the steward might have, all the remaining
pumpkins on board, with a box of sugar, and a dozen of his private
bottles of cider.

Not many minutes after the boat’s pushing off, to the vexation of all,
the wind entirely died away, and the tide turning, began drifting back
the ship helplessly seaward. But trusting this would not long last,
Captain Delano sought, with good hopes, to cheer up the strangers,
feeling no small satisfaction that, with persons in their condition, he
could—thanks to his frequent voyages along the Spanish main—converse
with some freedom in their native tongue.

While left alone with them, he was not long in observing some things
tending to heighten his first impressions; but surprise was lost in
pity, both for the Spaniards and blacks, alike evidently reduced from
scarcity of water and provisions; while long-continued suffering seemed
to have brought out the less good-natured qualities of the negroes,
besides, at the same time, impairing the Spaniard’s authority over
them. But, under the circumstances, precisely this condition of things
was to have been anticipated. In armies, navies, cities, or families,
in nature herself, nothing more relaxes good order than misery. Still,
Captain Delano was not without the idea, that had Benito Cereno been a
man of greater energy, misrule would hardly have come to the present
pass. But the debility, constitutional or induced by hardships, bodily
and mental, of the Spanish captain, was too obvious to be overlooked. A
prey to settled dejection, as if long mocked with hope he would not now
indulge it, even when it had ceased to be a mock, the prospect of that
day, or evening at furthest, lying at anchor, with plenty of water for
his people, and a brother captain to counsel and befriend, seemed in no
perceptible degree to encourage him. His mind appeared unstrung, if not
still more seriously affected. Shut up in these oaken walls, chained to
one dull round of command, whose unconditionality cloyed him, like some
hypochondriac abbot he moved slowly about, at times suddenly pausing,
starting, or staring, biting his lip, biting his finger-nail, flushing,
paling, twitching his beard, with other symptoms of an absent or moody
mind. This distempered spirit was lodged, as before hinted, in as
distempered a frame. He was rather tall, but seemed never to have been
robust, and now with nervous suffering was almost worn to a skeleton. A
tendency to some pulmonary complaint appeared to have been lately
confirmed. His voice was like that of one with lungs half gone—hoarsely
suppressed, a husky whisper. No wonder that, as in this state he
tottered about, his private servant apprehensively followed him.
Sometimes the negro gave his master his arm, or took his handkerchief
out of his pocket for him; performing these and similar offices with
that affectionate zeal which transmutes into something filial or
fraternal acts in themselves but menial; and which has gained for the
negro the repute of making the most pleasing body-servant in the world;
one, too, whom a master need be on no stiffly superior terms with, but
may treat with familiar trust; less a servant than a devoted companion.

Marking the noisy indocility of the blacks in general, as well as what
seemed the sullen inefficiency of the whites it was not without humane
satisfaction that Captain Delano witnessed the steady good conduct of
Babo.

But the good conduct of Babo, hardly more than the ill-behavior of
others, seemed to withdraw the half-lunatic Don Benito from his cloudy
languor. Not that such precisely was the impression made by the
Spaniard on the mind of his visitor. The Spaniard’s individual unrest
was, for the present, but noted as a conspicuous feature in the ship’s
general affliction. Still, Captain Delano was not a little concerned at
what he could not help taking for the time to be Don Benito’s
unfriendly indifference towards himself. The Spaniard’s manner, too,
conveyed a sort of sour and gloomy disdain, which he seemed at no pains
to disguise. But this the American in charity ascribed to the harassing
effects of sickness, since, in former instances, he had noted that
there are peculiar natures on whom prolonged physical suffering seems
to cancel every social instinct of kindness; as if, forced to black
bread themselves, they deemed it but equity that each person coming
nigh them should, indirectly, by some slight or affront, be made to
partake of their fare.

But ere long Captain Delano bethought him that, indulgent as he was at
the first, in judging the Spaniard, he might not, after all, have
exercised charity enough. At bottom it was Don Benito’s reserve which
displeased him; but the same reserve was shown towards all but his
faithful personal attendant. Even the formal reports which, according
to sea-usage, were, at stated times, made to him by some petty
underling, either a white, mulatto or black, he hardly had patience
enough to listen to, without betraying contemptuous aversion. His
manner upon such occasions was, in its degree, not unlike that which
might be supposed to have been his imperial countryman’s, Charles V.,
just previous to the anchoritish retirement of that monarch from the
throne.

This splenetic disrelish of his place was evinced in almost every
function pertaining to it. Proud as he was moody, he condescended to no
personal mandate. Whatever special orders were necessary, their
delivery was delegated to his body-servant, who in turn transferred
them to their ultimate destination, through runners, alert Spanish boys
or slave boys, like pages or pilot-fish within easy call continually
hovering round Don Benito. So that to have beheld this undemonstrative
invalid gliding about, apathetic and mute, no landsman could have
dreamed that in him was lodged a dictatorship beyond which, while at
sea, there was no earthly appeal.

Thus, the Spaniard, regarded in his reserve, seemed the involuntary
victim of mental disorder. But, in fact, his reserve might, in some
degree, have proceeded from design. If so, then here was evinced the
unhealthy climax of that icy though conscientious policy, more or less
adopted by all commanders of large ships, which, except in signal
emergencies, obliterates alike the manifestation of sway with every
trace of sociality; transforming the man into a block, or rather into a
loaded cannon, which, until there is call for thunder, has nothing to
say.

Viewing him in this light, it seemed but a natural token of the
perverse habit induced by a long course of such hard self-restraint,
that, notwithstanding the present condition of his ship, the Spaniard
should still persist in a demeanor, which, however harmless, or, it may
be, appropriate, in a well-appointed vessel, such as the San Dominick
might have been at the outset of the voyage, was anything but judicious
now. But the Spaniard, perhaps, thought that it was with captains as
with gods: reserve, under all events, must still be their cue. But
probably this appearance of slumbering dominion might have been but an
attempted disguise to conscious imbecility—not deep policy, but shallow
device. But be all this as it might, whether Don Benito’s manner was
designed or not, the more Captain Delano noted its pervading reserve,
the less he felt uneasiness at any particular manifestation of that
reserve towards himself.

Neither were his thoughts taken up by the captain alone. Wonted to the
quiet orderliness of the sealer’s comfortable family of a crew, the
noisy confusion of the San Dominick’s suffering host repeatedly
challenged his eye. Some prominent breaches, not only of discipline but
of decency, were observed. These Captain Delano could not but ascribe,
in the main, to the absence of those subordinate deck-officers to whom,
along with higher duties, is intrusted what may be styled the police
department of a populous ship. True, the old oakum-pickers appeared at
times to act the part of monitorial constables to their countrymen, the
blacks; but though occasionally succeeding in allaying trifling
outbreaks now and then between man and man, they could do little or
nothing toward establishing general quiet. The San Dominick was in the
condition of a transatlantic emigrant ship, among whose multitude of
living freight are some individuals, doubtless, as little troublesome
as crates and bales; but the friendly remonstrances of such with their
ruder companions are of not so much avail as the unfriendly arm of the
mate. What the San Dominick wanted was, what the emigrant ship has,
stern superior officers. But on these decks not so much as a
fourth-mate was to be seen.

The visitor’s curiosity was roused to learn the particulars of those
mishaps which had brought about such absenteeism, with its
consequences; because, though deriving some inkling of the voyage from
the wails which at the first moment had greeted him, yet of the details
no clear understanding had been had. The best account would, doubtless,
be given by the captain. Yet at first the visitor was loth to ask it,
unwilling to provoke some distant rebuff. But plucking up courage, he
at last accosted Don Benito, renewing the expression of his benevolent
interest, adding, that did he (Captain Delano) but know the particulars
of the ship’s misfortunes, he would, perhaps, be better able in the end
to relieve them. Would Don Benito favor him with the whole story.

Don Benito faltered; then, like some somnambulist suddenly interfered
with, vacantly stared at his visitor, and ended by looking down on the
deck. He maintained this posture so long, that Captain Delano, almost
equally disconcerted, and involuntarily almost as rude, turned suddenly
from him, walking forward to accost one of the Spanish seamen for the
desired information. But he had hardly gone five paces, when, with a
sort of eagerness, Don Benito invited him back, regretting his
momentary absence of mind, and professing readiness to gratify him.

While most part of the story was being given, the two captains stood on
the after part of the main-deck, a privileged spot, no one being near
but the servant.

“It is now a hundred and ninety days,” began the Spaniard, in his husky
whisper, “that this ship, well officered and well manned, with several
cabin passengers—some fifty Spaniards in all—sailed from Buenos Ayres
bound to Lima, with a general cargo, hardware, Paraguay tea and the
like—and,” pointing forward, “that parcel of negroes, now not more than
a hundred and fifty, as you see, but then numbering over three hundred
souls. Off Cape Horn we had heavy gales. In one moment, by night, three
of my best officers, with fifteen sailors, were lost, with the
main-yard; the spar snapping under them in the slings, as they sought,
with heavers, to beat down the icy sail. To lighten the hull, the
heavier sacks of mata were thrown into the sea, with most of the
water-pipes lashed on deck at the time. And this last necessity it was,
combined with the prolonged detections afterwards experienced, which
eventually brought about our chief causes of suffering. When—”

Here there was a sudden fainting attack of his cough, brought on, no
doubt, by his mental distress. His servant sustained him, and drawing a
cordial from his pocket placed it to his lips. He a little revived. But
unwilling to leave him unsupported while yet imperfectly restored, the
black with one arm still encircled his master, at the same time keeping
his eye fixed on his face, as if to watch for the first sign of
complete restoration, or relapse, as the event might prove.

The Spaniard proceeded, but brokenly and obscurely, as one in a dream.

—“Oh, my God! rather than pass through what I have, with joy I would
have hailed the most terrible gales; but—”

His cough returned and with increased violence; this subsiding; with
reddened lips and closed eyes he fell heavily against his supporter.

“His mind wanders. He was thinking of the plague that followed the
gales,” plaintively sighed the servant; “my poor, poor master!”
wringing one hand, and with the other wiping the mouth. “But be
patient, Señor,” again turning to Captain Delano, “these fits do not
last long; master will soon be himself.”

Don Benito reviving, went on; but as this portion of the story was very
brokenly delivered, the substance only will here be set down.

It appeared that after the ship had been many days tossed in storms off
the Cape, the scurvy broke out, carrying off numbers of the whites and
blacks. When at last they had worked round into the Pacific, their
spars and sails were so damaged, and so inadequately handled by the
surviving mariners, most of whom were become invalids, that, unable to
lay her northerly course by the wind, which was powerful, the
unmanageable ship, for successive days and nights, was blown
northwestward, where the breeze suddenly deserted her, in unknown
waters, to sultry calms. The absence of the water-pipes now proved as
fatal to life as before their presence had menaced it. Induced, or at
least aggravated, by the more than scanty allowance of water, a
malignant fever followed the scurvy; with the excessive heat of the
lengthened calm, making such short work of it as to sweep away, as by
billows, whole families of the Africans, and a yet larger number,
proportionably, of the Spaniards, including, by a luckless fatality,
every remaining officer on board. Consequently, in the smart west winds
eventually following the calm, the already rent sails, having to be
simply dropped, not furled, at need, had been gradually reduced to the
beggars’ rags they were now. To procure substitutes for his lost
sailors, as well as supplies of water and sails, the captain, at the
earliest opportunity, had made for Baldivia, the southernmost civilized
port of Chili and South America; but upon nearing the coast the thick
weather had prevented him from so much as sighting that harbor. Since
which period, almost without a crew, and almost without canvas and
almost without water, and, at intervals giving its added dead to the
sea, the San Dominick had been battle-dored about by contrary winds,
inveigled by currents, or grown weedy in calms. Like a man lost in
woods, more than once she had doubled upon her own track.

“But throughout these calamities,” huskily continued Don Benito,
painfully turning in the half embrace of his servant, “I have to thank
those negroes you see, who, though to your inexperienced eyes appearing
unruly, have, indeed, conducted themselves with less of restlessness
than even their owner could have thought possible under such
circumstances.”

Here he again fell faintly back. Again his mind wandered; but he
rallied, and less obscurely proceeded.

“Yes, their owner was quite right in assuring me that no fetters would
be needed with his blacks; so that while, as is wont in this
transportation, those negroes have always remained upon deck—not thrust
below, as in the Guinea-men—they have, also, from the beginning, been
freely permitted to range within given bounds at their pleasure.”

Once more the faintness returned—his mind roved—but, recovering, he
resumed:

“But it is Babo here to whom, under God, I owe not only my own
preservation, but likewise to him, chiefly, the merit is due, of
pacifying his more ignorant brethren, when at intervals tempted to
murmurings.”

“Ah, master,” sighed the black, bowing his face, “don’t speak of me;
Babo is nothing; what Babo has done was but duty.”

“Faithful fellow!” cried Captain Delano. “Don Benito, I envy you such a
friend; slave I cannot call him.”

As master and man stood before him, the black upholding the white,
Captain Delano could not but bethink him of the beauty of that
relationship which could present such a spectacle of fidelity on the
one hand and confidence on the other. The scene was heightened by, the
contrast in dress, denoting their relative positions. The Spaniard wore
a loose Chili jacket of dark velvet; white small-clothes and stockings,
with silver buckles at the knee and instep; a high-crowned sombrero, of
fine grass; a slender sword, silver mounted, hung from a knot in his
sash—the last being an almost invariable adjunct, more for utility than
ornament, of a South American gentleman’s dress to this hour. Excepting
when his occasional nervous contortions brought about disarray, there
was a certain precision in his attire curiously at variance with the
unsightly disorder around; especially in the belittered Ghetto, forward
of the main-mast, wholly occupied by the blacks.

The servant wore nothing but wide trowsers, apparently, from their
coarseness and patches, made out of some old topsail; they were clean,
and confined at the waist by a bit of unstranded rope, which, with his
composed, deprecatory air at times, made him look something like a
begging friar of St. Francis.

However unsuitable for the time and place, at least in the
blunt-thinking American’s eyes, and however strangely surviving in the
midst of all his afflictions, the toilette of Don Benito might not, in
fashion at least, have gone beyond the style of the day among South
Americans of his class. Though on the present voyage sailing from
Buenos Ayres, he had avowed himself a native and resident of Chili,
whose inhabitants had not so generally adopted the plain coat and once
plebeian pantaloons; but, with a becoming modification, adhered to
their provincial costume, picturesque as any in the world. Still,
relatively to the pale history of the voyage, and his own pale face,
there seemed something so incongruous in the Spaniard’s apparel, as
almost to suggest the image of an invalid courtier tottering about
London streets in the time of the plague.

The portion of the narrative which, perhaps, most excited interest, as
well as some surprise, considering the latitudes in question, was the
long calms spoken of, and more particularly the ship’s so long drifting
about. Without communicating the opinion, of course, the American could
not but impute at least part of the detentions both to clumsy
seamanship and faulty navigation. Eying Don Benito’s small, yellow
hands, he easily inferred that the young captain had not got into
command at the hawse-hole, but the cabin-window; and if so, why wonder
at incompetence, in youth, sickness, and gentility united?

But drowning criticism in compassion, after a fresh repetition of his
sympathies, Captain Delano, having heard out his story, not only
engaged, as in the first place, to see Don Benito and his people
supplied in their immediate bodily needs, but, also, now farther
promised to assist him in procuring a large permanent supply of water,
as well as some sails and rigging; and, though it would involve no
small embarrassment to himself, yet he would spare three of his best
seamen for temporary deck officers; so that without delay the ship
might proceed to Conception, there fully to refit for Lima, her
destined port.

Such generosity was not without its effect, even upon the invalid. His
face lighted up; eager and hectic, he met the honest glance of his
visitor. With gratitude he seemed overcome.

“This excitement is bad for master,” whispered the servant, taking his
arm, and with soothing words gently drawing him aside.

When Don Benito returned, the American was pained to observe that his
hopefulness, like the sudden kindling in his cheek, was but febrile and
transient.

Ere long, with a joyless mien, looking up towards the poop, the host
invited his guest to accompany him there, for the benefit of what
little breath of wind might be stirring.

As, during the telling of the story, Captain Delano had once or twice
started at the occasional cymballing of the hatchet-polishers,
wondering why such an interruption should be allowed, especially in
that part of the ship, and in the ears of an invalid; and moreover, as
the hatchets had anything but an attractive look, and the handlers of
them still less so, it was, therefore, to tell the truth, not without
some lurking reluctance, or even shrinking, it may be, that Captain
Delano, with apparent complaisance, acquiesced in his host’s
invitation. The more so, since, with an untimely caprice of punctilio,
rendered distressing by his cadaverous aspect, Don Benito, with
Castilian bows, solemnly insisted upon his guest’s preceding him up the
ladder leading to the elevation; where, one on each side of the last
step, sat for armorial supporters and sentries two of the ominous file.
Gingerly enough stepped good Captain Delano between them, and in the
instant of leaving them behind, like one running the gauntlet, he felt
an apprehensive twitch in the calves of his legs.

But when, facing about, he saw the whole file, like so many
organ-grinders, still stupidly intent on their work, unmindful of
everything beside, he could not but smile at his late fidgety panic.

Presently, while standing with his host, looking forward upon the decks
below, he was struck by one of those instances of insubordination
previously alluded to. Three black boys, with two Spanish boys, were
sitting together on the hatches, scraping a rude wooden platter, in
which some scanty mess had recently been cooked. Suddenly, one of the
black boys, enraged at a word dropped by one of his white companions,
seized a knife, and, though called to forbear by one of the
oakum-pickers, struck the lad over the head, inflicting a gash from
which blood flowed.

In amazement, Captain Delano inquired what this meant. To which the
pale Don Benito dully muttered, that it was merely the sport of the
lad.

“Pretty serious sport, truly,” rejoined Captain Delano. “Had such a
thing happened on board the Bachelor’s Delight, instant punishment
would have followed.”

At these words the Spaniard turned upon the American one of his sudden,
staring, half-lunatic looks; then, relapsing into his torpor, answered,
“Doubtless, doubtless, Señor.”

Is it, thought Captain Delano, that this hapless man is one of those
paper captains I’ve known, who by policy wink at what by power they
cannot put down? I know no sadder sight than a commander who has little
of command but the name.

“I should think, Don Benito,” he now said, glancing towards the
oakum-picker who had sought to interfere with the boys, “that you would
find it advantageous to keep all your blacks employed, especially the
younger ones, no matter at what useless task, and no matter what
happens to the ship. Why, even with my little band, I find such a
course indispensable. I once kept a crew on my quarter-deck thrumming
mats for my cabin, when, for three days, I had given up my ship—mats,
men, and all—for a speedy loss, owing to the violence of a gale, in
which we could do nothing but helplessly drive before it.”

“Doubtless, doubtless,” muttered Don Benito.

“But,” continued Captain Delano, again glancing upon the oakum-pickers
and then at the hatchet-polishers, near by, “I see you keep some, at
least, of your host employed.”

“Yes,” was again the vacant response.

“Those old men there, shaking their pows from their pulpits,” continued
Captain Delano, pointing to the oakum-pickers, “seem to act the part of
old dominies to the rest, little heeded as their admonitions are at
times. Is this voluntary on their part, Don Benito, or have you
appointed them shepherds to your flock of black sheep?”

“What posts they fill, I appointed them,” rejoined the Spaniard, in an
acrid tone, as if resenting some supposed satiric reflection.

“And these others, these Ashantee conjurors here,” continued Captain
Delano, rather uneasily eying the brandished steel of the
hatchet-polishers, where, in spots, it had been brought to a shine,
“this seems a curious business they are at, Don Benito?”

“In the gales we met,” answered the Spaniard, “what of our general
cargo was not thrown overboard was much damaged by the brine. Since
coming into calm weather, I have had several cases of knives and
hatchets daily brought up for overhauling and cleaning.”

“A prudent idea, Don Benito. You are part owner of ship and cargo, I
presume; but none of the slaves, perhaps?”

“I am owner of all you see,” impatiently returned Don Benito, “except
the main company of blacks, who belonged to my late friend, Alexandro
Aranda.”

As he mentioned this name, his air was heart-broken; his knees shook;
his servant supported him.

Thinking he divined the cause of such unusual emotion, to confirm his
surmise, Captain Delano, after a pause, said: “And may I ask, Don
Benito, whether—since awhile ago you spoke of some cabin passengers—the
friend, whose loss so afflicts you, at the outset of the voyage
accompanied his blacks?”

“Yes.”

“But died of the fever?”

“Died of the fever. Oh, could I but—”

Again quivering, the Spaniard paused.

“Pardon me,” said Captain Delano, lowly, “but I think that, by a
sympathetic experience, I conjecture, Don Benito, what it is that gives
the keener edge to your grief. It was once my hard fortune to lose, at
sea, a dear friend, my own brother, then supercargo. Assured of the
welfare of his spirit, its departure I could have borne like a man; but
that honest eye, that honest hand—both of which had so often met
mine—and that warm heart; all, all—like scraps to the dogs—to throw all
to the sharks! It was then I vowed never to have for fellow-voyager a
man I loved, unless, unbeknown to him, I had provided every requisite,
in case of a fatality, for embalming his mortal part for interment on
shore. Were your friend’s remains now on board this ship, Don Benito,
not thus strangely would the mention of his name affect you.”

“On board this ship?” echoed the Spaniard. Then, with horrified
gestures, as directed against some spectre, he unconsciously fell into
the ready arms of his attendant, who, with a silent appeal toward
Captain Delano, seemed beseeching him not again to broach a theme so
unspeakably distressing to his master.

This poor fellow now, thought the pained American, is the victim of
that sad superstition which associates goblins with the deserted body
of man, as ghosts with an abandoned house. How unlike are we made! What
to me, in like case, would have been a solemn satisfaction, the bare
suggestion, even, terrifies the Spaniard into this trance. Poor
Alexandro Aranda! what would you say could you here see your
friend—who, on former voyages, when you, for months, were left behind,
has, I dare say, often longed, and longed, for one peep at you—now
transported with terror at the least thought of having you anyway nigh
him.

At this moment, with a dreary grave-yard toll, betokening a flaw, the
ship’s forecastle bell, smote by one of the grizzled oakum-pickers,
proclaimed ten o’clock, through the leaden calm; when Captain Delano’s
attention was caught by the moving figure of a gigantic black, emerging
from the general crowd below, and slowly advancing towards the elevated
poop. An iron collar was about his neck, from which depended a chain,
thrice wound round his body; the terminating links padlocked together
at a broad band of iron, his girdle.

“How like a mute Atufal moves,” murmured the servant.

The black mounted the steps of the poop, and, like a brave prisoner,
brought up to receive sentence, stood in unquailing muteness before Don
Benito, now recovered from his attack.

At the first glimpse of his approach, Don Benito had started, a
resentful shadow swept over his face; and, as with the sudden memory of
bootless rage, his white lips glued together.

This is some mulish mutineer, thought Captain Delano, surveying, not
without a mixture of admiration, the colossal form of the negro.

“See, he waits your question, master,” said the servant.

Thus reminded, Don Benito, nervously averting his glance, as if
shunning, by anticipation, some rebellious response, in a disconcerted
voice, thus spoke:—

“Atufal, will you ask my pardon, now?”

The black was silent.

“Again, master,” murmured the servant, with bitter upbraiding eyeing
his countryman, “Again, master; he will bend to master yet.”

“Answer,” said Don Benito, still averting his glance, “say but the one
word, _pardon_, and your chains shall be off.”

Upon this, the black, slowly raising both arms, let them lifelessly
fall, his links clanking, his head bowed; as much as to say, “no, I am
content.”

“Go,” said Don Benito, with inkept and unknown emotion.

Deliberately as he had come, the black obeyed.

“Excuse me, Don Benito,” said Captain Delano, “but this scene surprises
me; what means it, pray?”

“It means that that negro alone, of all the band, has given me peculiar
cause of offense. I have put him in chains; I—”

Here he paused; his hand to his head, as if there were a swimming
there, or a sudden bewilderment of memory had come over him; but
meeting his servant’s kindly glance seemed reassured, and proceeded:—

“I could not scourge such a form. But I told him he must ask my pardon.
As yet he has not. At my command, every two hours he stands before me.”

“And how long has this been?”

“Some sixty days.”

“And obedient in all else? And respectful?”

“Yes.”

“Upon my conscience, then,” exclaimed Captain Delano, impulsively, “he
has a royal spirit in him, this fellow.”

“He may have some right to it,” bitterly returned Don Benito, “he says
he was king in his own land.”

“Yes,” said the servant, entering a word, “those slits in Atufal’s ears
once held wedges of gold; but poor Babo here, in his own land, was only
a poor slave; a black man’s slave was Babo, who now is the white’s.”

Somewhat annoyed by these conversational familiarities, Captain Delano
turned curiously upon the attendant, then glanced inquiringly at his
master; but, as if long wonted to these little informalities, neither
master nor man seemed to understand him.

“What, pray, was Atufal’s offense, Don Benito?” asked Captain Delano;
“if it was not something very serious, take a fool’s advice, and, in
view of his general docility, as well as in some natural respect for
his spirit, remit him his penalty.”

“No, no, master never will do that,” here murmured the servant to
himself, “proud Atufal must first ask master’s pardon. The slave there
carries the padlock, but master here carries the key.”

His attention thus directed, Captain Delano now noticed for the first,
that, suspended by a slender silken cord, from Don Benito’s neck, hung
a key. At once, from the servant’s muttered syllables, divining the
key’s purpose, he smiled, and said:—“So, Don Benito—padlock and
key—significant symbols, truly.”

Biting his lip, Don Benito faltered.

Though the remark of Captain Delano, a man of such native simplicity as
to be incapable of satire or irony, had been dropped in playful
allusion to the Spaniard’s singularly evidenced lordship over the
black; yet the hypochondriac seemed some way to have taken it as a
malicious reflection upon his confessed inability thus far to break
down, at least, on a verbal summons, the entrenched will of the slave.
Deploring this supposed misconception, yet despairing of correcting it,
Captain Delano shifted the subject; but finding his companion more than
ever withdrawn, as if still sourly digesting the lees of the presumed
affront above-mentioned, by-and-by Captain Delano likewise became less
talkative, oppressed, against his own will, by what seemed the secret
vindictiveness of the morbidly sensitive Spaniard. But the good sailor,
himself of a quite contrary disposition, refrained, on his part, alike
from the appearance as from the feeling of resentment, and if silent,
was only so from contagion.

Presently the Spaniard, assisted by his servant somewhat discourteously
crossed over from his guest; a procedure which, sensibly enough, might
have been allowed to pass for idle caprice of ill-humor, had not master
and man, lingering round the corner of the elevated skylight, began
whispering together in low voices. This was unpleasing. And more; the
moody air of the Spaniard, which at times had not been without a sort
of valetudinarian stateliness, now seemed anything but dignified; while
the menial familiarity of the servant lost its original charm of
simple-hearted attachment.

In his embarrassment, the visitor turned his face to the other side of
the ship. By so doing, his glance accidentally fell on a young Spanish
sailor, a coil of rope in his hand, just stepped from the deck to the
first round of the mizzen-rigging. Perhaps the man would not have been
particularly noticed, were it not that, during his ascent to one of the
yards, he, with a sort of covert intentness, kept his eye fixed on
Captain Delano, from whom, presently, it passed, as if by a natural
sequence, to the two whisperers.

His own attention thus redirected to that quarter, Captain Delano gave
a slight start. From something in Don Benito’s manner just then, it
seemed as if the visitor had, at least partly, been the subject of the
withdrawn consultation going on—a conjecture as little agreeable to the
guest as it was little flattering to the host.

The singular alternations of courtesy and ill-breeding in the Spanish
captain were unaccountable, except on one of two suppositions—innocent
lunacy, or wicked imposture.

But the first idea, though it might naturally have occurred to an
indifferent observer, and, in some respect, had not hitherto been
wholly a stranger to Captain Delano’s mind, yet, now that, in an
incipient way, he began to regard the stranger’s conduct something in
the light of an intentional affront, of course the idea of lunacy was
virtually vacated. But if not a lunatic, what then? Under the
circumstances, would a gentleman, nay, any honest boor, act the part
now acted by his host? The man was an impostor. Some low-born
adventurer, masquerading as an oceanic grandee; yet so ignorant of the
first requisites of mere gentlemanhood as to be betrayed into the
present remarkable indecorum. That strange ceremoniousness, too, at
other times evinced, seemed not uncharacteristic of one playing a part
above his real level. Benito Cereno—Don Benito Cereno—a sounding name.
One, too, at that period, not unknown, in the surname, to super-cargoes
and sea captains trading along the Spanish Main, as belonging to one of
the most enterprising and extensive mercantile families in all those
provinces; several members of it having titles; a sort of Castilian
Rothschild, with a noble brother, or cousin, in every great trading
town of South America. The alleged Don Benito was in early manhood,
about twenty-nine or thirty. To assume a sort of roving cadetship in
the maritime affairs of such a house, what more likely scheme for a
young knave of talent and spirit? But the Spaniard was a pale invalid.
Never mind. For even to the degree of simulating mortal disease, the
craft of some tricksters had been known to attain. To think that, under
the aspect of infantile weakness, the most savage energies might be
couched—those velvets of the Spaniard but the silky paw to his fangs.

From no train of thought did these fancies come; not from within, but
from without; suddenly, too, and in one throng, like hoar frost; yet as
soon to vanish as the mild sun of Captain Delano’s good-nature regained
its meridian.

Glancing over once more towards his host—whose side-face, revealed
above the skylight, was now turned towards him—he was struck by the
profile, whose clearness of cut was refined by the thinness, incident
to ill-health, as well as ennobled about the chin by the beard. Away
with suspicion. He was a true off-shoot of a true hidalgo Cereno.

Relieved by these and other better thoughts, the visitor, lightly
humming a tune, now began indifferently pacing the poop, so as not to
betray to Don Benito that he had at all mistrusted incivility, much
less duplicity; for such mistrust would yet be proved illusory, and by
the event; though, for the present, the circumstance which had provoked
that distrust remained unexplained. But when that little mystery should
have been cleared up, Captain Delano thought he might extremely regret
it, did he allow Don Benito to become aware that he had indulged in
ungenerous surmises. In short, to the Spaniard’s black-letter text, it
was best, for awhile, to leave open margin.

Presently, his pale face twitching and overcast, the Spaniard, still
supported by his attendant, moved over towards his guest, when, with
even more than his usual embarrassment, and a strange sort of
intriguing intonation in his husky whisper, the following conversation
began:—

“Señor, may I ask how long you have lain at this isle?”

“Oh, but a day or two, Don Benito.”

“And from what port are you last?”

“Canton.”

“And there, Señor, you exchanged your sealskins for teas and silks, I
think you said?”

“Yes, Silks, mostly.”

“And the balance you took in specie, perhaps?”

Captain Delano, fidgeting a little, answered—

“Yes; some silver; not a very great deal, though.”

“Ah—well. May I ask how many men have you, Señor?”

Captain Delano slightly started, but answered—

“About five-and-twenty, all told.”

“And at present, Señor, all on board, I suppose?”

“All on board, Don Benito,” replied the Captain, now with satisfaction.

“And will be to-night, Señor?”

At this last question, following so many pertinacious ones, for the
soul of him Captain Delano could not but look very earnestly at the
questioner, who, instead of meeting the glance, with every token of
craven discomposure dropped his eyes to the deck; presenting an
unworthy contrast to his servant, who, just then, was kneeling at his
feet, adjusting a loose shoe-buckle; his disengaged face meantime, with
humble curiosity, turned openly up into his master’s downcast one.

The Spaniard, still with a guilty shuffle, repeated his question:

“And—and will be to-night, Señor?”

“Yes, for aught I know,” returned Captain Delano—“but nay,” rallying
himself into fearless truth, “some of them talked of going off on
another fishing party about midnight.”

“Your ships generally go—go more or less armed, I believe, Señor?”

“Oh, a six-pounder or two, in case of emergency,” was the intrepidly
indifferent reply, “with a small stock of muskets, sealing-spears, and
cutlasses, you know.”

As he thus responded, Captain Delano again glanced at Don Benito, but
the latter’s eyes were averted; while abruptly and awkwardly shifting
the subject, he made some peevish allusion to the calm, and then,
without apology, once more, with his attendant, withdrew to the
opposite bulwarks, where the whispering was resumed.

At this moment, and ere Captain Delano could cast a cool thought upon
what had just passed, the young Spanish sailor, before mentioned, was
seen descending from the rigging. In act of stooping over to spring
inboard to the deck, his voluminous, unconfined frock, or shirt, of
coarse woolen, much spotted with tar, opened out far down the chest,
revealing a soiled under garment of what seemed the finest linen,
edged, about the neck, with a narrow blue ribbon, sadly faded and worn.
At this moment the young sailor’s eye was again fixed on the
whisperers, and Captain Delano thought he observed a lurking
significance in it, as if silent signs, of some Freemason sort, had
that instant been interchanged.

This once more impelled his own glance in the direction of Don Benito,
and, as before, he could not but infer that himself formed the subject
of the conference. He paused. The sound of the hatchet-polishing fell
on his ears. He cast another swift side-look at the two. They had the
air of conspirators. In connection with the late questionings, and the
incident of the young sailor, these things now begat such return of
involuntary suspicion, that the singular guilelessness of the American
could not endure it. Plucking up a gay and humorous expression, he
crossed over to the two rapidly, saying:—“Ha, Don Benito, your black
here seems high in your trust; a sort of privy-counselor, in fact.”

Upon this, the servant looked up with a good-natured grin, but the
master started as from a venomous bite. It was a moment or two before
the Spaniard sufficiently recovered himself to reply; which he did, at
last, with cold constraint:—“Yes, Señor, I have trust in Babo.”

Here Babo, changing his previous grin of mere animal humor into an
intelligent smile, not ungratefully eyed his master.

Finding that the Spaniard now stood silent and reserved, as if
involuntarily, or purposely giving hint that his guest’s proximity was
inconvenient just then, Captain Delano, unwilling to appear uncivil
even to incivility itself, made some trivial remark and moved off;
again and again turning over in his mind the mysterious demeanor of Don
Benito Cereno.

He had descended from the poop, and, wrapped in thought, was passing
near a dark hatchway, leading down into the steerage, when, perceiving
motion there, he looked to see what moved. The same instant there was a
sparkle in the shadowy hatchway, and he saw one of the Spanish sailors,
prowling there hurriedly placing his hand in the bosom of his frock, as
if hiding something. Before the man could have been certain who it was
that was passing, he slunk below out of sight. But enough was seen of
him to make it sure that he was the same young sailor before noticed in
the rigging.

What was that which so sparkled? thought Captain Delano. It was no
lamp—no match—no live coal. Could it have been a jewel? But how come
sailors with jewels?—or with silk-trimmed under-shirts either? Has he
been robbing the trunks of the dead cabin-passengers? But if so, he
would hardly wear one of the stolen articles on board ship here. Ah,
ah—if, now, that was, indeed, a secret sign I saw passing between this
suspicious fellow and his captain awhile since; if I could only be
certain that, in my uneasiness, my senses did not deceive me, then—

Here, passing from one suspicious thing to another, his mind revolved
the strange questions put to him concerning his ship.

By a curious coincidence, as each point was recalled, the black wizards
of Ashantee would strike up with their hatchets, as in ominous comment
on the white stranger’s thoughts. Pressed by such enigmas and portents,
it would have been almost against nature, had not, even into the least
distrustful heart, some ugly misgivings obtruded.

Observing the ship, now helplessly fallen into a current, with
enchanted sails, drifting with increased rapidity seaward; and noting
that, from a lately intercepted projection of the land, the sealer was
hidden, the stout mariner began to quake at thoughts which he barely
durst confess to himself. Above all, he began to feel a ghostly dread
of Don Benito. And yet, when he roused himself, dilated his chest, felt
himself strong on his legs, and coolly considered it—what did all these
phantoms amount to?

Had the Spaniard any sinister scheme, it must have reference not so
much to him (Captain Delano) as to his ship (the Bachelor’s Delight).
Hence the present drifting away of the one ship from the other, instead
of favoring any such possible scheme, was, for the time, at least,
opposed to it. Clearly any suspicion, combining such contradictions,
must need be delusive. Beside, was it not absurd to think of a vessel
in distress—a vessel by sickness almost dismanned of her crew—a vessel
whose inmates were parched for water—was it not a thousand times absurd
that such a craft should, at present, be of a piratical character; or
her commander, either for himself or those under him, cherish any
desire but for speedy relief and refreshment? But then, might not
general distress, and thirst in particular, be affected? And might not
that same undiminished Spanish crew, alleged to have perished off to a
remnant, be at that very moment lurking in the hold? On heart-broken
pretense of entreating a cup of cold water, fiends in human form had
got into lonely dwellings, nor retired until a dark deed had been done.
And among the Malay pirates, it was no unusual thing to lure ships
after them into their treacherous harbors, or entice boarders from a
declared enemy at sea, by the spectacle of thinly manned or vacant
decks, beneath which prowled a hundred spears with yellow arms ready to
upthrust them through the mats. Not that Captain Delano had entirely
credited such things. He had heard of them—and now, as stories, they
recurred. The present destination of the ship was the anchorage. There
she would be near his own vessel. Upon gaining that vicinity, might not
the San Dominick, like a slumbering volcano, suddenly let loose
energies now hid?

He recalled the Spaniard’s manner while telling his story. There was a
gloomy hesitancy and subterfuge about it. It was just the manner of one
making up his tale for evil purposes, as he goes. But if that story was
not true, what was the truth? That the ship had unlawfully come into
the Spaniard’s possession? But in many of its details, especially in
reference to the more calamitous parts, such as the fatalities among
the seamen, the consequent prolonged beating about, the past sufferings
from obstinate calms, and still continued suffering from thirst; in all
these points, as well as others, Don Benito’s story had corroborated
not only the wailing ejaculations of the indiscriminate multitude,
white and black, but likewise—what seemed impossible to be
counterfeit—by the very expression and play of every human feature,
which Captain Delano saw. If Don Benito’s story was, throughout, an
invention, then every soul on board, down to the youngest negress, was
his carefully drilled recruit in the plot: an incredible inference. And
yet, if there was ground for mistrusting his veracity, that inference
was a legitimate one.

But those questions of the Spaniard. There, indeed, one might pause.
Did they not seem put with much the same object with which the burglar
or assassin, by day-time, reconnoitres the walls of a house? But, with
ill purposes, to solicit such information openly of the chief person
endangered, and so, in effect, setting him on his guard; how unlikely a
procedure was that? Absurd, then, to suppose that those questions had
been prompted by evil designs. Thus, the same conduct, which, in this
instance, had raised the alarm, served to dispel it. In short, scarce
any suspicion or uneasiness, however apparently reasonable at the time,
which was not now, with equal apparent reason, dismissed.

At last he began to laugh at his former forebodings; and laugh at the
strange ship for, in its aspect, someway siding with them, as it were;
and laugh, too, at the odd-looking blacks, particularly those old
scissors-grinders, the Ashantees; and those bed-ridden old knitting
women, the oakum-pickers; and almost at the dark Spaniard himself, the
central hobgoblin of all.

For the rest, whatever in a serious way seemed enigmatical, was now
good-naturedly explained away by the thought that, for the most part,
the poor invalid scarcely knew what he was about; either sulking in
black vapors, or putting idle questions without sense or object.
Evidently for the present, the man was not fit to be intrusted with the
ship. On some benevolent plea withdrawing the command from him, Captain
Delano would yet have to send her to Conception, in charge of his
second mate, a worthy person and good navigator—a plan not more
convenient for the San Dominick than for Don Benito; for, relieved from
all anxiety, keeping wholly to his cabin, the sick man, under the good
nursing of his servant, would, probably, by the end of the passage, be
in a measure restored to health, and with that he should also be
restored to authority.

Such were the American’s thoughts. They were tranquilizing. There was a
difference between the idea of Don Benito’s darkly pre-ordaining
Captain Delano’s fate, and Captain Delano’s lightly arranging Don
Benito’s. Nevertheless, it was not without something of relief that the
good seaman presently perceived his whale-boat in the distance. Its
absence had been prolonged by unexpected detention at the sealer’s
side, as well as its returning trip lengthened by the continual
recession of the goal.

The advancing speck was observed by the blacks. Their shouts attracted
the attention of Don Benito, who, with a return of courtesy,
approaching Captain Delano, expressed satisfaction at the coming of
some supplies, slight and temporary as they must necessarily prove.

Captain Delano responded; but while doing so, his attention was drawn
to something passing on the deck below: among the crowd climbing the
landward bulwarks, anxiously watching the coming boat, two blacks, to
all appearances accidentally incommoded by one of the sailors,
violently pushed him aside, which the sailor someway resenting, they
dashed him to the deck, despite the earnest cries of the oakum-pickers.

“Don Benito,” said Captain Delano quickly, “do you see what is going on
there? Look!”

But, seized by his cough, the Spaniard staggered, with both hands to
his face, on the point of falling. Captain Delano would have supported
him, but the servant was more alert, who, with one hand sustaining his
master, with the other applied the cordial. Don Benito restored, the
black withdrew his support, slipping aside a little, but dutifully
remaining within call of a whisper. Such discretion was here evinced as
quite wiped away, in the visitor’s eyes, any blemish of impropriety
which might have attached to the attendant, from the indecorous
conferences before mentioned; showing, too, that if the servant were to
blame, it might be more the master’s fault than his own, since, when
left to himself, he could conduct thus well.

His glance called away from the spectacle of disorder to the more
pleasing one before him, Captain Delano could not avoid again
congratulating his host upon possessing such a servant, who, though
perhaps a little too forward now and then, must upon the whole be
invaluable to one in the invalid’s situation.

“Tell me, Don Benito,” he added, with a smile—“I should like to have
your man here, myself—what will you take for him? Would fifty doubloons
be any object?”

“Master wouldn’t part with Babo for a thousand doubloons,” murmured the
black, overhearing the offer, and taking it in earnest, and, with the
strange vanity of a faithful slave, appreciated by his master, scorning
to hear so paltry a valuation put upon him by a stranger. But Don
Benito, apparently hardly yet completely restored, and again
interrupted by his cough, made but some broken reply.

Soon his physical distress became so great, affecting his mind, too,
apparently, that, as if to screen the sad spectacle, the servant gently
conducted his master below.

Left to himself, the American, to while away the time till his boat
should arrive, would have pleasantly accosted some one of the few
Spanish seamen he saw; but recalling something that Don Benito had said
touching their ill conduct, he refrained; as a shipmaster indisposed to
countenance cowardice or unfaithfulness in seamen.

While, with these thoughts, standing with eye directed forward towards
that handful of sailors, suddenly he thought that one or two of them
returned the glance and with a sort of meaning. He rubbed his eyes, and
looked again; but again seemed to see the same thing. Under a new form,
but more obscure than any previous one, the old suspicions recurred,
but, in the absence of Don Benito, with less of panic than before.
Despite the bad account given of the sailors, Captain Delano resolved
forthwith to accost one of them. Descending the poop, he made his way
through the blacks, his movement drawing a queer cry from the
oakum-pickers, prompted by whom, the negroes, twitching each other
aside, divided before him; but, as if curious to see what was the
object of this deliberate visit to their Ghetto, closing in behind, in
tolerable order, followed the white stranger up. His progress thus
proclaimed as by mounted kings-at-arms, and escorted as by a Caffre
guard of honor, Captain Delano, assuming a good-humored, off-handed
air, continued to advance; now and then saying a blithe word to the
negroes, and his eye curiously surveying the white faces, here and
there sparsely mixed in with the blacks, like stray white pawns
venturously involved in the ranks of the chess-men opposed.

While thinking which of them to select for his purpose, he chanced to
observe a sailor seated on the deck engaged in tarring the strap of a
large block, a circle of blacks squatted round him inquisitively eying
the process.

The mean employment of the man was in contrast with something superior
in his figure. His hand, black with continually thrusting it into the
tar-pot held for him by a negro, seemed not naturally allied to his
face, a face which would have been a very fine one but for its
haggardness. Whether this haggardness had aught to do with criminality,
could not be determined; since, as intense heat and cold, though
unlike, produce like sensations, so innocence and guilt, when, through
casual association with mental pain, stamping any visible impress, use
one seal—a hacked one.

Not again that this reflection occurred to Captain Delano at the time,
charitable man as he was. Rather another idea. Because observing so
singular a haggardness combined with a dark eye, averted as in trouble
and shame, and then again recalling Don Benito’s confessed ill opinion
of his crew, insensibly he was operated upon by certain general notions
which, while disconnecting pain and abashment from virtue, invariably
link them with vice.

If, indeed, there be any wickedness on board this ship, thought Captain
Delano, be sure that man there has fouled his hand in it, even as now
he fouls it in the pitch. I don’t like to accost him. I will speak to
this other, this old Jack here on the windlass.

He advanced to an old Barcelona tar, in ragged red breeches and dirty
night-cap, cheeks trenched and bronzed, whiskers dense as thorn hedges.
Seated between two sleepy-looking Africans, this mariner, like his
younger shipmate, was employed upon some rigging—splicing a cable—the
sleepy-looking blacks performing the inferior function of holding the
outer parts of the ropes for him.

Upon Captain Delano’s approach, the man at once hung his head below its
previous level; the one necessary for business. It appeared as if he
desired to be thought absorbed, with more than common fidelity, in his
task. Being addressed, he glanced up, but with what seemed a furtive,
diffident air, which sat strangely enough on his weather-beaten visage,
much as if a grizzly bear, instead of growling and biting, should
simper and cast sheep’s eyes. He was asked several questions concerning
the voyage—questions purposely referring to several particulars in Don
Benito’s narrative, not previously corroborated by those impulsive
cries greeting the visitor on first coming on board. The questions were
briefly answered, confirming all that remained to be confirmed of the
story. The negroes about the windlass joined in with the old sailor;
but, as they became talkative, he by degrees became mute, and at length
quite glum, seemed morosely unwilling to answer more questions, and
yet, all the while, this ursine air was somehow mixed with his sheepish
one.

Despairing of getting into unembarrassed talk with such a centaur,
Captain Delano, after glancing round for a more promising countenance,
but seeing none, spoke pleasantly to the blacks to make way for him;
and so, amid various grins and grimaces, returned to the poop, feeling
a little strange at first, he could hardly tell why, but upon the whole
with regained confidence in Benito Cereno.

How plainly, thought he, did that old whiskerando yonder betray a
consciousness of ill desert. No doubt, when he saw me coming, he
dreaded lest I, apprised by his Captain of the crew’s general
misbehavior, came with sharp words for him, and so down with his head.
And yet—and yet, now that I think of it, that very old fellow, if I err
not, was one of those who seemed so earnestly eying me here awhile
since. Ah, these currents spin one’s head round almost as much as they
do the ship. Ha, there now’s a pleasant sort of sunny sight; quite
sociable, too.

His attention had been drawn to a slumbering negress, partly disclosed
through the lacework of some rigging, lying, with youthful limbs
carelessly disposed, under the lee of the bulwarks, like a doe in the
shade of a woodland rock. Sprawling at her lapped breasts, was her
wide-awake fawn, stark naked, its black little body half lifted from
the deck, crosswise with its dam’s; its hands, like two paws,
clambering upon her; its mouth and nose ineffectually rooting to get at
the mark; and meantime giving a vexatious half-grunt, blending with the
composed snore of the negress.

The uncommon vigor of the child at length roused the mother. She
started up, at a distance facing Captain Delano. But as if not at all
concerned at the attitude in which she had been caught, delightedly she
caught the child up, with maternal transports, covering it with kisses.

There’s naked nature, now; pure tenderness and love, thought Captain
Delano, well pleased.

This incident prompted him to remark the other negresses more
particularly than before. He was gratified with their manners: like
most uncivilized women, they seemed at once tender of heart and tough
of constitution; equally ready to die for their infants or fight for
them. Unsophisticated as leopardesses; loving as doves. Ah! thought
Captain Delano, these, perhaps, are some of the very women whom Ledyard
saw in Africa, and gave such a noble account of.

These natural sights somehow insensibly deepened his confidence and
ease. At last he looked to see how his boat was getting on; but it was
still pretty remote. He turned to see if Don Benito had returned; but
he had not.

To change the scene, as well as to please himself with a leisurely
observation of the coming boat, stepping over into the mizzen-chains,
he clambered his way into the starboard quarter-gallery—one of those
abandoned Venetian-looking water-balconies previously
mentioned—retreats cut off from the deck. As his foot pressed the
half-damp, half-dry sea-mosses matting the place, and a chance phantom
cats-paw—an islet of breeze, unheralded, unfollowed—as this ghostly
cats-paw came fanning his cheek; as his glance fell upon the row of
small, round dead-lights—all closed like coppered eyes of the
coffined—and the state-cabin door, once connecting with the gallery,
even as the dead-lights had once looked out upon it, but now calked
fast like a sarcophagus lid; and to a purple-black tarred-over, panel,
threshold, and post; and he bethought him of the time, when that
state-cabin and this state-balcony had heard the voices of the Spanish
king’s officers, and the forms of the Lima viceroy’s daughters had
perhaps leaned where he stood—as these and other images flitted through
his mind, as the cats-paw through the calm, gradually he felt rising a
dreamy inquietude, like that of one who alone on the prairie feels
unrest from the repose of the noon.

He leaned against the carved balustrade, again looking off toward his
boat; but found his eye falling upon the ribbon grass, trailing along
the ship’s water-line, straight as a border of green box; and parterres
of sea-weed, broad ovals and crescents, floating nigh and far, with
what seemed long formal alleys between, crossing the terraces of
swells, and sweeping round as if leading to the grottoes below. And
overhanging all was the balustrade by his arm, which, partly stained
with pitch and partly embossed with moss, seemed the charred ruin of
some summer-house in a grand garden long running to waste.

Trying to break one charm, he was but becharmed anew. Though upon the
wide sea, he seemed in some far inland country; prisoner in some
deserted château, left to stare at empty grounds, and peer out at vague
roads, where never wagon or wayfarer passed.

But these enchantments were a little disenchanted as his eye fell on
the corroded main-chains. Of an ancient style, massy and rusty in link,
shackle and bolt, they seemed even more fit for the ship’s present
business than the one for which she had been built.

Presently he thought something moved nigh the chains. He rubbed his
eyes, and looked hard. Groves of rigging were about the chains; and
there, peering from behind a great stay, like an Indian from behind a
hemlock, a Spanish sailor, a marlingspike in his hand, was seen, who
made what seemed an imperfect gesture towards the balcony, but
immediately as if alarmed by some advancing step along the deck within,
vanished into the recesses of the hempen forest, like a poacher.

What meant this? Something the man had sought to communicate, unbeknown
to any one, even to his captain. Did the secret involve aught
unfavorable to his captain? Were those previous misgivings of Captain
Delano’s about to be verified? Or, in his haunted mood at the moment,
had some random, unintentional motion of the man, while busy with the
stay, as if repairing it, been mistaken for a significant beckoning?

Not unbewildered, again he gazed off for his boat. But it was
temporarily hidden by a rocky spur of the isle. As with some eagerness
he bent forward, watching for the first shooting view of its beak, the
balustrade gave way before him like charcoal. Had he not clutched an
outreaching rope he would have fallen into the sea. The crash, though
feeble, and the fall, though hollow, of the rotten fragments, must have
been overheard. He glanced up. With sober curiosity peering down upon
him was one of the old oakum-pickers, slipped from his perch to an
outside boom; while below the old negro, and, invisible to him,
reconnoitering from a port-hole like a fox from the mouth of its den,
crouched the Spanish sailor again. From something suddenly suggested by
the man’s air, the mad idea now darted into Captain Delano’s mind, that
Don Benito’s plea of indisposition, in withdrawing below, was but a
pretense: that he was engaged there maturing his plot, of which the
sailor, by some means gaining an inkling, had a mind to warn the
stranger against; incited, it may be, by gratitude for a kind word on
first boarding the ship. Was it from foreseeing some possible
interference like this, that Don Benito had, beforehand, given such a
bad character of his sailors, while praising the negroes; though,
indeed, the former seemed as docile as the latter the contrary? The
whites, too, by nature, were the shrewder race. A man with some evil
design, would he not be likely to speak well of that stupidity which
was blind to his depravity, and malign that intelligence from which it
might not be hidden? Not unlikely, perhaps. But if the whites had dark
secrets concerning Don Benito, could then Don Benito be any way in
complicity with the blacks? But they were too stupid. Besides, who ever
heard of a white so far a renegade as to apostatize from his very
species almost, by leaguing in against it with negroes? These
difficulties recalled former ones. Lost in their mazes, Captain Delano,
who had now regained the deck, was uneasily advancing along it, when he
observed a new face; an aged sailor seated cross-legged near the main
hatchway. His skin was shrunk up with wrinkles like a pelican’s empty
pouch; his hair frosted; his countenance grave and composed. His hands
were full of ropes, which he was working into a large knot. Some blacks
were about him obligingly dipping the strands for him, here and there,
as the exigencies of the operation demanded.

Captain Delano crossed over to him, and stood in silence surveying the
knot; his mind, by a not uncongenial transition, passing from its own
entanglements to those of the hemp. For intricacy, such a knot he had
never seen in an American ship, nor indeed any other. The old man
looked like an Egyptian priest, making Gordian knots for the temple of
Ammon. The knot seemed a combination of double-bowline-knot,
treble-crown-knot, back-handed-well-knot, knot-in-and-out-knot, and
jamming-knot.

At last, puzzled to comprehend the meaning of such a knot, Captain
Delano addressed the knotter:—

“What are you knotting there, my man?”

“The knot,” was the brief reply, without looking up.

“So it seems; but what is it for?”

“For some one else to undo,” muttered back the old man, plying his
fingers harder than ever, the knot being now nearly completed.

While Captain Delano stood watching him, suddenly the old man threw the
knot towards him, saying in broken English—the first heard in the
ship—something to this effect: “Undo it, cut it, quick.” It was said
lowly, but with such condensation of rapidity, that the long, slow
words in Spanish, which had preceded and followed, almost operated as
covers to the brief English between.

For a moment, knot in hand, and knot in head, Captain Delano stood
mute; while, without further heeding him, the old man was now intent
upon other ropes. Presently there was a slight stir behind Captain
Delano. Turning, he saw the chained negro, Atufal, standing quietly
there. The next moment the old sailor rose, muttering, and, followed by
his subordinate negroes, removed to the forward part of the ship, where
in the crowd he disappeared.

An elderly negro, in a clout like an infant’s, and with a pepper and
salt head, and a kind of attorney air, now approached Captain Delano.
In tolerable Spanish, and with a good-natured, knowing wink, he
informed him that the old knotter was simple-witted, but harmless;
often playing his odd tricks. The negro concluded by begging the knot,
for of course the stranger would not care to be troubled with it.
Unconsciously, it was handed to him. With a sort of congé, the negro
received it, and, turning his back, ferreted into it like a detective
custom-house officer after smuggled laces. Soon, with some African
word, equivalent to pshaw, he tossed the knot overboard.

All this is very queer now, thought Captain Delano, with a qualmish
sort of emotion; but, as one feeling incipient sea-sickness, he strove,
by ignoring the symptoms, to get rid of the malady. Once more he looked
off for his boat. To his delight, it was now again in view, leaving the
rocky spur astern.

The sensation here experienced, after at first relieving his
uneasiness, with unforeseen efficacy soon began to remove it. The less
distant sight of that well-known boat—showing it, not as before, half
blended with the haze, but with outline defined, so that its
individuality, like a man’s, was manifest; that boat, Rover by name,
which, though now in strange seas, had often pressed the beach of
Captain Delano’s home, and, brought to its threshold for repairs, had
familiarly lain there, as a Newfoundland dog; the sight of that
household boat evoked a thousand trustful associations, which,
contrasted with previous suspicions, filled him not only with lightsome
confidence, but somehow with half humorous self-reproaches at his
former lack of it.

“What, I, Amasa Delano—Jack of the Beach, as they called me when a
lad—I, Amasa; the same that, duck-satchel in hand, used to paddle along
the water-side to the school-house made from the old hulk—I, little
Jack of the Beach, that used to go berrying with cousin Nat and the
rest; I to be murdered here at the ends of the earth, on board a
haunted pirate-ship by a horrible Spaniard? Too nonsensical to think
of! Who would murder Amasa Delano? His conscience is clean. There is
some one above. Fie, fie, Jack of the Beach! you are a child indeed; a
child of the second childhood, old boy; you are beginning to dote and
drule, I’m afraid.”

Light of heart and foot, he stepped aft, and there was met by Don
Benito’s servant, who, with a pleasing expression, responsive to his
own present feelings, informed him that his master had recovered from
the effects of his coughing fit, and had just ordered him to go present
his compliments to his good guest, Don Amasa, and say that he (Don
Benito) would soon have the happiness to rejoin him.

There now, do you mark that? again thought Captain Delano, walking the
poop. What a donkey I was. This kind gentleman who here sends me his
kind compliments, he, but ten minutes ago, dark-lantern in had, was
dodging round some old grind-stone in the hold, sharpening a hatchet
for me, I thought. Well, well; these long calms have a morbid effect on
the mind, I’ve often heard, though I never believed it before. Ha!
glancing towards the boat; there’s Rover; good dog; a white bone in her
mouth. A pretty big bone though, seems to me.—What? Yes, she has fallen
afoul of the bubbling tide-rip there. It sets her the other way, too,
for the time. Patience.

It was now about noon, though, from the grayness of everything, it
seemed to be getting towards dusk.

The calm was confirmed. In the far distance, away from the influence of
land, the leaden ocean seemed laid out and leaded up, its course
finished, soul gone, defunct. But the current from landward, where the
ship was, increased; silently sweeping her further and further towards
the tranced waters beyond.

Still, from his knowledge of those latitudes, cherishing hopes of a
breeze, and a fair and fresh one, at any moment, Captain Delano,
despite present prospects, buoyantly counted upon bringing the San
Dominick safely to anchor ere night. The distance swept over was
nothing; since, with a good wind, ten minutes’ sailing would retrace
more than sixty minutes, drifting. Meantime, one moment turning to mark
“Rover” fighting the tide-rip, and the next to see Don Benito
approaching, he continued walking the poop.

Gradually he felt a vexation arising from the delay of his boat; this
soon merged into uneasiness; and at last—his eye falling continually,
as from a stage-box into the pit, upon the strange crowd before and
below him, and, by-and-by, recognizing there the face—now composed to
indifference—of the Spanish sailor who had seemed to beckon from the
main-chains—something of his old trepidations returned.

Ah, thought he—gravely enough—this is like the ague: because it went
off, it follows not that it won’t come back.

Though ashamed of the relapse, he could not altogether subdue it; and
so, exerting his good-nature to the utmost, insensibly he came to a
compromise.

Yes, this is a strange craft; a strange history, too, and strange folks
on board. But—nothing more.

By way of keeping his mind out of mischief till the boat should arrive,
he tried to occupy it with turning over and over, in a purely
speculative sort of way, some lesser peculiarities of the captain and
crew. Among others, four curious points recurred:

First, the affair of the Spanish lad assailed with a knife by the slave
boy; an act winked at by Don Benito. Second, the tyranny in Don
Benito’s treatment of Atufal, the black; as if a child should lead a
bull of the Nile by the ring in his nose. Third, the trampling of the
sailor by the two negroes; a piece of insolence passed over without so
much as a reprimand. Fourth, the cringing submission to their master,
of all the ship’s underlings, mostly blacks; as if by the least
inadvertence they feared to draw down his despotic displeasure.

Coupling these points, they seemed somewhat contradictory. But what
then, thought Captain Delano, glancing towards his now nearing
boat—what then? Why, Don Benito is a very capricious commander. But he
is not the first of the sort I have seen; though it’s true he rather
exceeds any other. But as a nation—continued he in his reveries—these
Spaniards are all an odd set; the very word Spaniard has a curious,
conspirator, Guy-Fawkish twang to it. And yet, I dare say, Spaniards in
the main are as good folks as any in Duxbury, Massachusetts. Ah good!
At last “Rover” has come.

As, with its welcome freight, the boat touched the side, the
oakum-pickers, with venerable gestures, sought to restrain the blacks,
who, at the sight of three gurried water-casks in its bottom, and a
pile of wilted pumpkins in its bow, hung over the bulwarks in
disorderly raptures.

Don Benito, with his servant, now appeared; his coming, perhaps,
hastened by hearing the noise. Of him Captain Delano sought permission
to serve out the water, so that all might share alike, and none injure
themselves by unfair excess. But sensible, and, on Don Benito’s
account, kind as this offer was, it was received with what seemed
impatience; as if aware that he lacked energy as a commander, Don
Benito, with the true jealousy of weakness, resented as an affront any
interference. So, at least, Captain Delano inferred.

In another moment the casks were being hoisted in, when some of the
eager negroes accidentally jostled Captain Delano, where he stood by
the gangway; so, that, unmindful of Don Benito, yielding to the impulse
of the moment, with good-natured authority he bade the blacks stand
back; to enforce his words making use of a half-mirthful, half-menacing
gesture. Instantly the blacks paused, just where they were, each negro
and negress suspended in his or her posture, exactly as the word had
found them—for a few seconds continuing so—while, as between the
responsive posts of a telegraph, an unknown syllable ran from man to
man among the perched oakum-pickers. While the visitor’s attention was
fixed by this scene, suddenly the hatchet-polishers half rose, and a
rapid cry came from Don Benito.

Thinking that at the signal of the Spaniard he was about to be
massacred, Captain Delano would have sprung for his boat, but paused,
as the oakum-pickers, dropping down into the crowd with earnest
exclamations, forced every white and every negro back, at the same
moment, with gestures friendly and familiar, almost jocose, bidding
him, in substance, not be a fool. Simultaneously the hatchet-polishers
resumed their seats, quietly as so many tailors, and at once, as if
nothing had happened, the work of hoisting in the casks was resumed,
whites and blacks singing at the tackle.

Captain Delano glanced towards Don Benito. As he saw his meagre form in
the act of recovering itself from reclining in the servant’s arms, into
which the agitated invalid had fallen, he could not but marvel at the
panic by which himself had been surprised, on the darting supposition
that such a commander, who, upon a legitimate occasion, so trivial,
too, as it now appeared, could lose all self-command, was, with
energetic iniquity, going to bring about his murder.

The casks being on deck, Captain Delano was handed a number of jars and
cups by one of the steward’s aids, who, in the name of his captain,
entreated him to do as he had proposed—dole out the water. He complied,
with republican impartiality as to this republican element, which
always seeks one level, serving the oldest white no better than the
youngest black; excepting, indeed, poor Don Benito, whose condition, if
not rank, demanded an extra allowance. To him, in the first place,
Captain Delano presented a fair pitcher of the fluid; but, thirsting as
he was for it, the Spaniard quaffed not a drop until after several
grave bows and salutes. A reciprocation of courtesies which the
sight-loving Africans hailed with clapping of hands.

Two of the less wilted pumpkins being reserved for the cabin table, the
residue were minced up on the spot for the general regalement. But the
soft bread, sugar, and bottled cider, Captain Delano would have given
the whites alone, and in chief Don Benito; but the latter objected;
which disinterestedness not a little pleased the American; and so
mouthfuls all around were given alike to whites and blacks; excepting
one bottle of cider, which Babo insisted upon setting aside for his
master.

Here it may be observed that as, on the first visit of the boat, the
American had not permitted his men to board the ship, neither did he
now; being unwilling to add to the confusion of the decks.

Not uninfluenced by the peculiar good-humor at present prevailing, and
for the time oblivious of any but benevolent thoughts, Captain Delano,
who, from recent indications, counted upon a breeze within an hour or
two at furthest, dispatched the boat back to the sealer, with orders
for all the hands that could be spared immediately to set about rafting
casks to the watering-place and filling them. Likewise he bade word be
carried to his chief officer, that if, against present expectation, the
ship was not brought to anchor by sunset, he need be under no concern;
for as there was to be a full moon that night, he (Captain Delano)
would remain on board ready to play the pilot, come the wind soon or
late.

As the two Captains stood together, observing the departing boat—the
servant, as it happened, having just spied a spot on his master’s
velvet sleeve, and silently engaged rubbing it out—the American
expressed his regrets that the San Dominick had no boats; none, at
least, but the unseaworthy old hulk of the long-boat, which, warped as
a camel’s skeleton in the desert, and almost as bleached, lay pot-wise
inverted amidships, one side a little tipped, furnishing a
subterraneous sort of den for family groups of the blacks, mostly women
and small children; who, squatting on old mats below, or perched above
in the dark dome, on the elevated seats, were descried, some distance
within, like a social circle of bats, sheltering in some friendly cave;
at intervals, ebon flights of naked boys and girls, three or four years
old, darting in and out of the den’s mouth.

“Had you three or four boats now, Don Benito,” said Captain Delano, “I
think that, by tugging at the oars, your negroes here might help along
matters some. Did you sail from port without boats, Don Benito?”

“They were stove in the gales, Señor.”

“That was bad. Many men, too, you lost then. Boats and men. Those must
have been hard gales, Don Benito.”

“Past all speech,” cringed the Spaniard.

“Tell me, Don Benito,” continued his companion with increased interest,
“tell me, were these gales immediately off the pitch of Cape Horn?”

“Cape Horn?—who spoke of Cape Horn?”

“Yourself did, when giving me an account of your voyage,” answered
Captain Delano, with almost equal astonishment at this eating of his
own words, even as he ever seemed eating his own heart, on the part of
the Spaniard. “You yourself, Don Benito, spoke of Cape Horn,” he
emphatically repeated.

The Spaniard turned, in a sort of stooping posture, pausing an instant,
as one about to make a plunging exchange of elements, as from air to
water.

At this moment a messenger-boy, a white, hurried by, in the regular
performance of his function carrying the last expired half hour forward
to the forecastle, from the cabin time-piece, to have it struck at the
ship’s large bell.

“Master,” said the servant, discontinuing his work on the coat sleeve,
and addressing the rapt Spaniard with a sort of timid apprehensiveness,
as one charged with a duty, the discharge of which, it was foreseen,
would prove irksome to the very person who had imposed it, and for
whose benefit it was intended, “master told me never mind where he was,
or how engaged, always to remind him to a minute, when shaving-time
comes. Miguel has gone to strike the half-hour afternoon. It is _now_,
master. Will master go into the cuddy?”

“Ah—yes,” answered the Spaniard, starting, as from dreams into
realities; then turning upon Captain Delano, he said that ere long he
would resume the conversation.

“Then if master means to talk more to Don Amasa,” said the servant,
“why not let Don Amasa sit by master in the cuddy, and master can talk,
and Don Amasa can listen, while Babo here lathers and strops.”

“Yes,” said Captain Delano, not unpleased with this sociable plan,
“yes, Don Benito, unless you had rather not, I will go with you.”

“Be it so, Señor.”

As the three passed aft, the American could not but think it another
strange instance of his host’s capriciousness, this being shaved with
such uncommon punctuality in the middle of the day. But he deemed it
more than likely that the servant’s anxious fidelity had something to
do with the matter; inasmuch as the timely interruption served to rally
his master from the mood which had evidently been coming upon him.

The place called the cuddy was a light deck-cabin formed by the poop, a
sort of attic to the large cabin below. Part of it had formerly been
the quarters of the officers; but since their death all the
partitioning had been thrown down, and the whole interior converted
into one spacious and airy marine hall; for absence of fine furniture
and picturesque disarray of odd appurtenances, somewhat answering to
the wide, cluttered hall of some eccentric bachelor-squire in the
country, who hangs his shooting-jacket and tobacco-pouch on deer
antlers, and keeps his fishing-rod, tongs, and walking-stick in the
same corner.

The similitude was heightened, if not originally suggested, by glimpses
of the surrounding sea; since, in one aspect, the country and the ocean
seem cousins-german.

The floor of the cuddy was matted. Overhead, four or five old muskets
were stuck into horizontal holes along the beams. On one side was a
claw-footed old table lashed to the deck; a thumbed missal on it, and
over it a small, meagre crucifix attached to the bulk-head. Under the
table lay a dented cutlass or two, with a hacked harpoon, among some
melancholy old rigging, like a heap of poor friars’ girdles. There were
also two long, sharp-ribbed settees of Malacca cane, black with age,
and uncomfortable to look at as inquisitors’ racks, with a large,
misshapen arm-chair, which, furnished with a rude barber’s crotch at
the back, working with a screw, seemed some grotesque engine of
torment. A flag locker was in one corner, open, exposing various
colored bunting, some rolled up, others half unrolled, still others
tumbled. Opposite was a cumbrous washstand, of black mahogany, all of
one block, with a pedestal, like a font, and over it a railed shelf,
containing combs, brushes, and other implements of the toilet. A torn
hammock of stained grass swung near; the sheets tossed, and the pillow
wrinkled up like a brow, as if who ever slept here slept but illy, with
alternate visitations of sad thoughts and bad dreams.

The further extremity of the cuddy, overhanging the ship’s stern, was
pierced with three openings, windows or port-holes, according as men or
cannon might peer, socially or unsocially, out of them. At present
neither men nor cannon were seen, though huge ring-bolts and other
rusty iron fixtures of the wood-work hinted of twenty-four-pounders.

Glancing towards the hammock as he entered, Captain Delano said, “You
sleep here, Don Benito?”

“Yes, Señor, since we got into mild weather.”

“This seems a sort of dormitory, sitting-room, sail-loft, chapel,
armory, and private closet all together, Don Benito,” added Captain
Delano, looking round.

“Yes, Señor; events have not been favorable to much order in my
arrangements.”

Here the servant, napkin on arm, made a motion as if waiting his
master’s good pleasure. Don Benito signified his readiness, when,
seating him in the Malacca arm-chair, and for the guest’s convenience
drawing opposite one of the settees, the servant commenced operations
by throwing back his master’s collar and loosening his cravat.

There is something in the negro which, in a peculiar way, fits him for
avocations about one’s person. Most negroes are natural valets and
hair-dressers; taking to the comb and brush congenially as to the
castinets, and flourishing them apparently with almost equal
satisfaction. There is, too, a smooth tact about them in this
employment, with a marvelous, noiseless, gliding briskness, not
ungraceful in its way, singularly pleasing to behold, and still more so
to be the manipulated subject of. And above all is the great gift of
good-humor. Not the mere grin or laugh is here meant. Those were
unsuitable. But a certain easy cheerfulness, harmonious in every glance
and gesture; as though God had set the whole negro to some pleasant
tune.

When to this is added the docility arising from the unaspiring
contentment of a limited mind and that susceptibility of blind
attachment sometimes inhering in indisputable inferiors, one readily
perceives why those hypochondriacs, Johnson and Byron—it may be,
something like the hypochondriac Benito Cereno—took to their hearts,
almost to the exclusion of the entire white race, their serving men,
the negroes, Barber and Fletcher. But if there be that in the negro
which exempts him from the inflicted sourness of the morbid or cynical
mind, how, in his most prepossessing aspects, must he appear to a
benevolent one? When at ease with respect to exterior things, Captain
Delano’s nature was not only benign, but familiarly and humorously so.
At home, he had often taken rare satisfaction in sitting in his door,
watching some free man of color at his work or play. If on a voyage he
chanced to have a black sailor, invariably he was on chatty and
half-gamesome terms with him. In fact, like most men of a good, blithe
heart, Captain Delano took to negroes, not philanthropically, but
genially, just as other men to Newfoundland dogs.

Hitherto, the circumstances in which he found the San Dominick had
repressed the tendency. But in the cuddy, relieved from his former
uneasiness, and, for various reasons, more sociably inclined than at
any previous period of the day, and seeing the colored servant, napkin
on arm, so debonair about his master, in a business so familiar as that
of shaving, too, all his old weakness for negroes returned.

Among other things, he was amused with an odd instance of the African
love of bright colors and fine shows, in the black’s informally taking
from the flag-locker a great piece of bunting of all hues, and lavishly
tucking it under his master’s chin for an apron.

The mode of shaving among the Spaniards is a little different from what
it is with other nations. They have a basin, specifically called a
barber’s basin, which on one side is scooped out, so as accurately to
receive the chin, against which it is closely held in lathering; which
is done, not with a brush, but with soap dipped in the water of the
basin and rubbed on the face.

In the present instance salt-water was used for lack of better; and the
parts lathered were only the upper lip, and low down under the throat,
all the rest being cultivated beard.

The preliminaries being somewhat novel to Captain Delano, he sat
curiously eying them, so that no conversation took place, nor, for the
present, did Don Benito appear disposed to renew any.

Setting down his basin, the negro searched among the razors, as for the
sharpest, and having found it, gave it an additional edge by expertly
strapping it on the firm, smooth, oily skin of his open palm; he then
made a gesture as if to begin, but midway stood suspended for an
instant, one hand elevating the razor, the other professionally
dabbling among the bubbling suds on the Spaniard’s lank neck. Not
unaffected by the close sight of the gleaming steel, Don Benito
nervously shuddered; his usual ghastliness was heightened by the
lather, which lather, again, was intensified in its hue by the
contrasting sootiness of the negro’s body. Altogether the scene was
somewhat peculiar, at least to Captain Delano, nor, as he saw the two
thus postured, could he resist the vagary, that in the black he saw a
headsman, and in the white a man at the block. But this was one of
those antic conceits, appearing and vanishing in a breath, from which,
perhaps, the best regulated mind is not always free.

Meantime the agitation of the Spaniard had a little loosened the
bunting from around him, so that one broad fold swept curtain-like over
the chair-arm to the floor, revealing, amid a profusion of armorial
bars and ground-colors—black, blue, and yellow—a closed castle in a
blood red field diagonal with a lion rampant in a white.

“The castle and the lion,” exclaimed Captain Delano—“why, Don Benito,
this is the flag of Spain you use here. It’s well it’s only I, and not
the King, that sees this,” he added, with a smile, “but”—turning
towards the black—“it’s all one, I suppose, so the colors be gay;”
which playful remark did not fail somewhat to tickle the negro.

“Now, master,” he said, readjusting the flag, and pressing the head
gently further back into the crotch of the chair; “now, master,” and
the steel glanced nigh the throat.

Again Don Benito faintly shuddered.

“You must not shake so, master. See, Don Amasa, master always shakes
when I shave him. And yet master knows I never yet have drawn blood,
though it’s true, if master will shake so, I may some of these times.
Now master,” he continued. “And now, Don Amasa, please go on with your
talk about the gale, and all that; master can hear, and, between times,
master can answer.”

“Ah yes, these gales,” said Captain Delano; “but the more I think of
your voyage, Don Benito, the more I wonder, not at the gales, terrible
as they must have been, but at the disastrous interval following them.
For here, by your account, have you been these two months and more
getting from Cape Horn to St. Maria, a distance which I myself, with a
good wind, have sailed in a few days. True, you had calms, and long
ones, but to be becalmed for two months, that is, at least, unusual.
Why, Don Benito, had almost any other gentleman told me such a story, I
should have been half disposed to a little incredulity.”

Here an involuntary expression came over the Spaniard, similar to that
just before on the deck, and whether it was the start he gave, or a
sudden gawky roll of the hull in the calm, or a momentary unsteadiness
of the servant’s hand, however it was, just then the razor drew blood,
spots of which stained the creamy lather under the throat: immediately
the black barber drew back his steel, and, remaining in his
professional attitude, back to Captain Delano, and face to Don Benito,
held up the trickling razor, saying, with a sort of half humorous
sorrow, “See, master—you shook so—here’s Babo’s first blood.”

No sword drawn before James the First of England, no assassination in
that timid King’s presence, could have produced a more terrified aspect
than was now presented by Don Benito.

Poor fellow, thought Captain Delano, so nervous he can’t even bear the
sight of barber’s blood; and this unstrung, sick man, is it credible
that I should have imagined he meant to spill all my blood, who can’t
endure the sight of one little drop of his own? Surely, Amasa Delano,
you have been beside yourself this day. Tell it not when you get home,
sappy Amasa. Well, well, he looks like a murderer, doesn’t he? More
like as if himself were to be done for. Well, well, this day’s
experience shall be a good lesson.

Meantime, while these things were running through the honest seaman’s
mind, the servant had taken the napkin from his arm, and to Don Benito
had said—“But answer Don Amasa, please, master, while I wipe this ugly
stuff off the razor, and strop it again.”

As he said the words, his face was turned half round, so as to be alike
visible to the Spaniard and the American, and seemed, by its
expression, to hint, that he was desirous, by getting his master to go
on with the conversation, considerately to withdraw his attention from
the recent annoying accident. As if glad to snatch the offered relief,
Don Benito resumed, rehearsing to Captain Delano, that not only were
the calms of unusual duration, but the ship had fallen in with
obstinate currents; and other things he added, some of which were but
repetitions of former statements, to explain how it came to pass that
the passage from Cape Horn to St. Maria had been so exceedingly long;
now and then, mingling with his words, incidental praises, less
qualified than before, to the blacks, for their general good conduct.
These particulars were not given consecutively, the servant, at
convenient times, using his razor, and so, between the intervals of
shaving, the story and panegyric went on with more than usual
huskiness.

To Captain Delano’s imagination, now again not wholly at rest, there
was something so hollow in the Spaniard’s manner, with apparently some
reciprocal hollowness in the servant’s dusky comment of silence, that
the idea flashed across him, that possibly master and man, for some
unknown purpose, were acting out, both in word and deed, nay, to the
very tremor of Don Benito’s limbs, some juggling play before him.
Neither did the suspicion of collusion lack apparent support, from the
fact of those whispered conferences before mentioned. But then, what
could be the object of enacting this play of the barber before him? At
last, regarding the notion as a whimsy, insensibly suggested, perhaps,
by the theatrical aspect of Don Benito in his harlequin ensign, Captain
Delano speedily banished it.

The shaving over, the servant bestirred himself with a small bottle of
scented waters, pouring a few drops on the head, and then diligently
rubbing; the vehemence of the exercise causing the muscles of his face
to twitch rather strangely.

His next operation was with comb, scissors, and brush; going round and
round, smoothing a curl here, clipping an unruly whisker-hair there,
giving a graceful sweep to the temple-lock, with other impromptu
touches evincing the hand of a master; while, like any resigned
gentleman in barber’s hands, Don Benito bore all, much less uneasily,
at least than he had done the razoring; indeed, he sat so pale and
rigid now, that the negro seemed a Nubian sculptor finishing off a
white statue-head.

All being over at last, the standard of Spain removed, tumbled up, and
tossed back into the flag-locker, the negro’s warm breath blowing away
any stray hair, which might have lodged down his master’s neck; collar
and cravat readjusted; a speck of lint whisked off the velvet lapel;
all this being done; backing off a little space, and pausing with an
expression of subdued self-complacency, the servant for a moment
surveyed his master, as, in toilet at least, the creature of his own
tasteful hands.

Captain Delano playfully complimented him upon his achievement; at the
same time congratulating Don Benito.

But neither sweet waters, nor shampooing, nor fidelity, nor sociality,
delighted the Spaniard. Seeing him relapsing into forbidding gloom, and
still remaining seated, Captain Delano, thinking that his presence was
undesired just then, withdrew, on pretense of seeing whether, as he had
prophesied, any signs of a breeze were visible.

Walking forward to the main-mast, he stood awhile thinking over the
scene, and not without some undefined misgivings, when he heard a noise
near the cuddy, and turning, saw the negro, his hand to his cheek.
Advancing, Captain Delano perceived that the cheek was bleeding. He was
about to ask the cause, when the negro’s wailing soliloquy enlightened
him.

“Ah, when will master get better from his sickness; only the sour heart
that sour sickness breeds made him serve Babo so; cutting Babo with the
razor, because, only by accident, Babo had given master one little
scratch; and for the first time in so many a day, too. Ah, ah, ah,”
holding his hand to his face.

Is it possible, thought Captain Delano; was it to wreak in private his
Spanish spite against this poor friend of his, that Don Benito, by his
sullen manner, impelled me to withdraw? Ah this slavery breeds ugly
passions in man.—Poor fellow!

He was about to speak in sympathy to the negro, but with a timid
reluctance he now re-entered the cuddy.

Presently master and man came forth; Don Benito leaning on his servant
as if nothing had happened.

But a sort of love-quarrel, after all, thought Captain Delano.

He accosted Don Benito, and they slowly walked together. They had gone
but a few paces, when the steward—a tall, rajah-looking mulatto,
orientally set off with a pagoda turban formed by three or four Madras
handkerchiefs wound about his head, tier on tier—approaching with a
saalam, announced lunch in the cabin.

On their way thither, the two captains were preceded by the mulatto,
who, turning round as he advanced, with continual smiles and bows,
ushered them on, a display of elegance which quite completed the
insignificance of the small bare-headed Babo, who, as if not
unconscious of inferiority, eyed askance the graceful steward. But in
part, Captain Delano imputed his jealous watchfulness to that peculiar
feeling which the full-blooded African entertains for the adulterated
one. As for the steward, his manner, if not bespeaking much dignity of
self-respect, yet evidenced his extreme desire to please; which is
doubly meritorious, as at once Christian and Chesterfieldian.

Captain Delano observed with interest that while the complexion of the
mulatto was hybrid, his physiognomy was European—classically so.

“Don Benito,” whispered he, “I am glad to see this
usher-of-the-golden-rod of yours; the sight refutes an ugly remark once
made to me by a Barbadoes planter; that when a mulatto has a regular
European face, look out for him; he is a devil. But see, your steward
here has features more regular than King George’s of England; and yet
there he nods, and bows, and smiles; a king, indeed—the king of kind
hearts and polite fellows. What a pleasant voice he has, too?”

“He has, Señor.”

“But tell me, has he not, so far as you have known him, always proved a
good, worthy fellow?” said Captain Delano, pausing, while with a final
genuflexion the steward disappeared into the cabin; “come, for the
reason just mentioned, I am curious to know.”

“Francesco is a good man,” a sort of sluggishly responded Don Benito,
like a phlegmatic appreciator, who would neither find fault nor
flatter.

“Ah, I thought so. For it were strange, indeed, and not very creditable
to us white-skins, if a little of our blood mixed with the African’s,
should, far from improving the latter’s quality, have the sad effect of
pouring vitriolic acid into black broth; improving the hue, perhaps,
but not the wholesomeness.”

“Doubtless, doubtless, Señor, but”—glancing at Babo—“not to speak of
negroes, your planter’s remark I have heard applied to the Spanish and
Indian intermixtures in our provinces. But I know nothing about the
matter,” he listlessly added.

And here they entered the cabin.

The lunch was a frugal one. Some of Captain Delano’s fresh fish and
pumpkins, biscuit and salt beef, the reserved bottle of cider, and the
San Dominick’s last bottle of Canary.

As they entered, Francesco, with two or three colored aids, was
hovering over the table giving the last adjustments. Upon perceiving
their master they withdrew, Francesco making a smiling congé, and the
Spaniard, without condescending to notice it, fastidiously remarking to
his companion that he relished not superfluous attendance.

Without companions, host and guest sat down, like a childless married
couple, at opposite ends of the table, Don Benito waving Captain Delano
to his place, and, weak as he was, insisting upon that gentleman being
seated before himself.

The negro placed a rug under Don Benito’s feet, and a cushion behind
his back, and then stood behind, not his master’s chair, but Captain
Delano’s. At first, this a little surprised the latter. But it was soon
evident that, in taking his position, the black was still true to his
master; since by facing him he could the more readily anticipate his
slightest want.

“This is an uncommonly intelligent fellow of yours, Don Benito,”
whispered Captain Delano across the table.

“You say true, Señor.”

During the repast, the guest again reverted to parts of Don Benito’s
story, begging further particulars here and there. He inquired how it
was that the scurvy and fever should have committed such wholesale
havoc upon the whites, while destroying less than half of the blacks.
As if this question reproduced the whole scene of plague before the
Spaniard’s eyes, miserably reminding him of his solitude in a cabin
where before he had had so many friends and officers round him, his
hand shook, his face became hueless, broken words escaped; but directly
the sane memory of the past seemed replaced by insane terrors of the
present. With starting eyes he stared before him at vacancy. For
nothing was to be seen but the hand of his servant pushing the Canary
over towards him. At length a few sips served partially to restore him.
He made random reference to the different constitution of races,
enabling one to offer more resistance to certain maladies than another.
The thought was new to his companion.

Presently Captain Delano, intending to say something to his host
concerning the pecuniary part of the business he had undertaken for
him, especially—since he was strictly accountable to his owners—with
reference to the new suit of sails, and other things of that sort; and
naturally preferring to conduct such affairs in private, was desirous
that the servant should withdraw; imagining that Don Benito for a few
minutes could dispense with his attendance. He, however, waited awhile;
thinking that, as the conversation proceeded, Don Benito, without being
prompted, would perceive the propriety of the step.

But it was otherwise. At last catching his host’s eye, Captain Delano,
with a slight backward gesture of his thumb, whispered, “Don Benito,
pardon me, but there is an interference with the full expression of
what I have to say to you.”

Upon this the Spaniard changed countenance; which was imputed to his
resenting the hint, as in some way a reflection upon his servant. After
a moment’s pause, he assured his guest that the black’s remaining with
them could be of no disservice; because since losing his officers he
had made Babo (whose original office, it now appeared, had been captain
of the slaves) not only his constant attendant and companion, but in
all things his confidant.

After this, nothing more could be said; though, indeed, Captain Delano
could hardly avoid some little tinge of irritation upon being left
ungratified in so inconsiderable a wish, by one, too, for whom he
intended such solid services. But it is only his querulousness, thought
he; and so filling his glass he proceeded to business.

The price of the sails and other matters was fixed upon. But while this
was being done, the American observed that, though his original offer
of assistance had been hailed with hectic animation, yet now when it
was reduced to a business transaction, indifference and apathy were
betrayed. Don Benito, in fact, appeared to submit to hearing the
details more out of regard to common propriety, than from any
impression that weighty benefit to himself and his voyage was involved.

Soon, his manner became still more reserved. The effort was vain to
seek to draw him into social talk. Gnawed by his splenetic mood, he sat
twitching his beard, while to little purpose the hand of his servant,
mute as that on the wall, slowly pushed over the Canary.

Lunch being over, they sat down on the cushioned transom; the servant
placing a pillow behind his master. The long continuance of the calm
had now affected the atmosphere. Don Benito sighed heavily, as if for
breath.

“Why not adjourn to the cuddy,” said Captain Delano; “there is more air
there.” But the host sat silent and motionless.

Meantime his servant knelt before him, with a large fan of feathers.
And Francesco coming in on tiptoes, handed the negro a little cup of
aromatic waters, with which at intervals he chafed his master’s brow;
smoothing the hair along the temples as a nurse does a child’s. He
spoke no word. He only rested his eye on his master’s, as if, amid all
Don Benito’s distress, a little to refresh his spirit by the silent
sight of fidelity.

Presently the ship’s bell sounded two o’clock; and through the cabin
windows a slight rippling of the sea was discerned; and from the
desired direction.

“There,” exclaimed Captain Delano, “I told you so, Don Benito, look!”

He had risen to his feet, speaking in a very animated tone, with a view
the more to rouse his companion. But though the crimson curtain of the
stern-window near him that moment fluttered against his pale cheek, Don
Benito seemed to have even less welcome for the breeze than the calm.

Poor fellow, thought Captain Delano, bitter experience has taught him
that one ripple does not make a wind, any more than one swallow a
summer. But he is mistaken for once. I will get his ship in for him,
and prove it.

Briefly alluding to his weak condition, he urged his host to remain
quietly where he was, since he (Captain Delano) would with pleasure
take upon himself the responsibility of making the best use of the
wind.

Upon gaining the deck, Captain Delano started at the unexpected figure
of Atufal, monumentally fixed at the threshold, like one of those
sculptured porters of black marble guarding the porches of Egyptian
tombs.

But this time the start was, perhaps, purely physical. Atufal’s
presence, singularly attesting docility even in sullenness, was
contrasted with that of the hatchet-polishers, who in patience evinced
their industry; while both spectacles showed, that lax as Don Benito’s
general authority might be, still, whenever he chose to exert it, no
man so savage or colossal but must, more or less, bow.

Snatching a trumpet which hung from the bulwarks, with a free step
Captain Delano advanced to the forward edge of the poop, issuing his
orders in his best Spanish. The few sailors and many negroes, all
equally pleased, obediently set about heading the ship towards the
harbor.

While giving some directions about setting a lower stu’n’-sail,
suddenly Captain Delano heard a voice faithfully repeating his orders.
Turning, he saw Babo, now for the time acting, under the pilot, his
original part of captain of the slaves. This assistance proved
valuable. Tattered sails and warped yards were soon brought into some
trim. And no brace or halyard was pulled but to the blithe songs of the
inspirited negroes.

Good fellows, thought Captain Delano, a little training would make fine
sailors of them. Why see, the very women pull and sing too. These must
be some of those Ashantee negresses that make such capital soldiers,
I’ve heard. But who’s at the helm. I must have a good hand there.

He went to see.

The San Dominick steered with a cumbrous tiller, with large horizontal
pullies attached. At each pully-end stood a subordinate black, and
between them, at the tiller-head, the responsible post, a Spanish
seaman, whose countenance evinced his due share in the general
hopefulness and confidence at the coming of the breeze.

He proved the same man who had behaved with so shame-faced an air on
the windlass.

“Ah,—it is you, my man,” exclaimed Captain Delano—“well, no more
sheep’s-eyes now;—look straight forward and keep the ship so. Good
hand, I trust? And want to get into the harbor, don’t you?”

The man assented with an inward chuckle, grasping the tiller-head
firmly. Upon this, unperceived by the American, the two blacks eyed the
sailor intently.

Finding all right at the helm, the pilot went forward to the
forecastle, to see how matters stood there.

The ship now had way enough to breast the current. With the approach of
evening, the breeze would be sure to freshen.

Having done all that was needed for the present, Captain Delano, giving
his last orders to the sailors, turned aft to report affairs to Don
Benito in the cabin; perhaps additionally incited to rejoin him by the
hope of snatching a moment’s private chat while the servant was engaged
upon deck.

From opposite sides, there were, beneath the poop, two approaches to
the cabin; one further forward than the other, and consequently
communicating with a longer passage. Marking the servant still above,
Captain Delano, taking the nighest entrance—the one last named, and at
whose porch Atufal still stood—hurried on his way, till, arrived at the
cabin threshold, he paused an instant, a little to recover from his
eagerness. Then, with the words of his intended business upon his lips,
he entered. As he advanced toward the seated Spaniard, he heard another
footstep, keeping time with his. From the opposite door, a salver in
hand, the servant was likewise advancing.

“Confound the faithful fellow,” thought Captain Delano; “what a
vexatious coincidence.”

Possibly, the vexation might have been something different, were it not
for the brisk confidence inspired by the breeze. But even as it was, he
felt a slight twinge, from a sudden indefinite association in his mind
of Babo with Atufal.

“Don Benito,” said he, “I give you joy; the breeze will hold, and will
increase. By the way, your tall man and time-piece, Atufal, stands
without. By your order, of course?”

Don Benito recoiled, as if at some bland satirical touch, delivered
with such adroit garnish of apparent good breeding as to present no
handle for retort.

He is like one flayed alive, thought Captain Delano; where may one
touch him without causing a shrink?

The servant moved before his master, adjusting a cushion; recalled to
civility, the Spaniard stiffly replied: “you are right. The slave
appears where you saw him, according to my command; which is, that if
at the given hour I am below, he must take his stand and abide my
coming.”

“Ah now, pardon me, but that is treating the poor fellow like an
ex-king indeed. Ah, Don Benito,” smiling, “for all the license you
permit in some things, I fear lest, at bottom, you are a bitter hard
master.”

Again Don Benito shrank; and this time, as the good sailor thought,
from a genuine twinge of his conscience.

Again conversation became constrained. In vain Captain Delano called
attention to the now perceptible motion of the keel gently cleaving the
sea; with lack-lustre eye, Don Benito returned words few and reserved.

By-and-by, the wind having steadily risen, and still blowing right into
the harbor bore the San Dominick swiftly on. Sounding a point of land,
the sealer at distance came into open view.

Meantime Captain Delano had again repaired to the deck, remaining there
some time. Having at last altered the ship’s course, so as to give the
reef a wide berth, he returned for a few moments below.

I will cheer up my poor friend, this time, thought he.

“Better and better,” Don Benito, he cried as he blithely re-entered:
“there will soon be an end to your cares, at least for awhile. For
when, after a long, sad voyage, you know, the anchor drops into the
haven, all its vast weight seems lifted from the captain’s heart. We
are getting on famously, Don Benito. My ship is in sight. Look through
this side-light here; there she is; all a-taunt-o! The Bachelor’s
Delight, my good friend. Ah, how this wind braces one up. Come, you
must take a cup of coffee with me this evening. My old steward will
give you as fine a cup as ever any sultan tasted. What say you, Don
Benito, will you?”

At first, the Spaniard glanced feverishly up, casting a longing look
towards the sealer, while with mute concern his servant gazed into his
face. Suddenly the old ague of coldness returned, and dropping back to
his cushions he was silent.

“You do not answer. Come, all day you have been my host; would you have
hospitality all on one side?”

“I cannot go,” was the response.

“What? it will not fatigue you. The ships will lie together as near as
they can, without swinging foul. It will be little more than stepping
from deck to deck; which is but as from room to room. Come, come, you
must not refuse me.”

“I cannot go,” decisively and repulsively repeated Don Benito.

Renouncing all but the last appearance of courtesy, with a sort of
cadaverous sullenness, and biting his thin nails to the quick, he
glanced, almost glared, at his guest, as if impatient that a stranger’s
presence should interfere with the full indulgence of his morbid hour.
Meantime the sound of the parted waters came more and more gurglingly
and merrily in at the windows; as reproaching him for his dark spleen;
as telling him that, sulk as he might, and go mad with it, nature cared
not a jot; since, whose fault was it, pray?

But the foul mood was now at its depth, as the fair wind at its height.

There was something in the man so far beyond any mere unsociality or
sourness previously evinced, that even the forbearing good-nature of
his guest could no longer endure it. Wholly at a loss to account for
such demeanor, and deeming sickness with eccentricity, however extreme,
no adequate excuse, well satisfied, too, that nothing in his own
conduct could justify it, Captain Delano’s pride began to be roused.
Himself became reserved. But all seemed one to the Spaniard. Quitting
him, therefore, Captain Delano once more went to the deck.

The ship was now within less than two miles of the sealer. The
whale-boat was seen darting over the interval.

To be brief, the two vessels, thanks to the pilot’s skill, ere long
neighborly style lay anchored together.

Before returning to his own vessel, Captain Delano had intended
communicating to Don Benito the smaller details of the proposed
services to be rendered. But, as it was, unwilling anew to subject
himself to rebuffs, he resolved, now that he had seen the San Dominick
safely moored, immediately to quit her, without further allusion to
hospitality or business. Indefinitely postponing his ulterior plans, he
would regulate his future actions according to future circumstances.
His boat was ready to receive him; but his host still tarried below.
Well, thought Captain Delano, if he has little breeding, the more need
to show mine. He descended to the cabin to bid a ceremonious, and, it
may be, tacitly rebukeful adieu. But to his great satisfaction, Don
Benito, as if he began to feel the weight of that treatment with which
his slighted guest had, not indecorously, retaliated upon him, now
supported by his servant, rose to his feet, and grasping Captain
Delano’s hand, stood tremulous; too much agitated to speak. But the
good augury hence drawn was suddenly dashed, by his resuming all his
previous reserve, with augmented gloom, as, with half-averted eyes, he
silently reseated himself on his cushions. With a corresponding return
of his own chilled feelings, Captain Delano bowed and withdrew.

He was hardly midway in the narrow corridor, dim as a tunnel, leading
from the cabin to the stairs, when a sound, as of the tolling for
execution in some jail-yard, fell on his ears. It was the echo of the
ship’s flawed bell, striking the hour, drearily reverberated in this
subterranean vault. Instantly, by a fatality not to be withstood, his
mind, responsive to the portent, swarmed with superstitious suspicions.
He paused. In images far swifter than these sentences, the minutest
details of all his former distrusts swept through him.

Hitherto, credulous good-nature had been too ready to furnish excuses
for reasonable fears. Why was the Spaniard, so superfluously
punctilious at times, now heedless of common propriety in not
accompanying to the side his departing guest? Did indisposition forbid?
Indisposition had not forbidden more irksome exertion that day. His
last equivocal demeanor recurred. He had risen to his feet, grasped his
guest’s hand, motioned toward his hat; then, in an instant, all was
eclipsed in sinister muteness and gloom. Did this imply one brief,
repentant relenting at the final moment, from some iniquitous plot,
followed by remorseless return to it? His last glance seemed to express
a calamitous, yet acquiescent farewell to Captain Delano forever. Why
decline the invitation to visit the sealer that evening? Or was the
Spaniard less hardened than the Jew, who refrained not from supping at
the board of him whom the same night he meant to betray? What imported
all those day-long enigmas and contradictions, except they were
intended to mystify, preliminary to some stealthy blow? Atufal, the
pretended rebel, but punctual shadow, that moment lurked by the
threshold without. He seemed a sentry, and more. Who, by his own
confession, had stationed him there? Was the negro now lying in wait?

The Spaniard behind—his creature before: to rush from darkness to light
was the involuntary choice.

The next moment, with clenched jaw and hand, he passed Atufal, and
stood unharmed in the light. As he saw his trim ship lying peacefully
at anchor, and almost within ordinary call; as he saw his household
boat, with familiar faces in it, patiently rising and falling, on the
short waves by the San Dominick’s side; and then, glancing about the
decks where he stood, saw the oakum-pickers still gravely plying their
fingers; and heard the low, buzzing whistle and industrious hum of the
hatchet-polishers, still bestirring themselves over their endless
occupation; and more than all, as he saw the benign aspect of nature,
taking her innocent repose in the evening; the screened sun in the
quiet camp of the west shining out like the mild light from Abraham’s
tent; as charmed eye and ear took in all these, with the chained figure
of the black, clenched jaw and hand relaxed. Once again he smiled at
the phantoms which had mocked him, and felt something like a tinge of
remorse, that, by harboring them even for a moment, he should, by
implication, have betrayed an atheist doubt of the ever-watchful
Providence above.

There was a few minutes’ delay, while, in obedience to his orders, the
boat was being hooked along to the gangway. During this interval, a
sort of saddened satisfaction stole over Captain Delano, at thinking of
the kindly offices he had that day discharged for a stranger. Ah,
thought he, after good actions one’s conscience is never ungrateful,
however much so the benefited party may be.

Presently, his foot, in the first act of descent into the boat, pressed
the first round of the side-ladder, his face presented inward upon the
deck. In the same moment, he heard his name courteously sounded; and,
to his pleased surprise, saw Don Benito advancing—an unwonted energy in
his air, as if, at the last moment, intent upon making amends for his
recent discourtesy. With instinctive good feeling, Captain Delano,
withdrawing his foot, turned and reciprocally advanced. As he did so,
the Spaniard’s nervous eagerness increased, but his vital energy
failed; so that, the better to support him, the servant, placing his
master’s hand on his naked shoulder, and gently holding it there,
formed himself into a sort of crutch.

When the two captains met, the Spaniard again fervently took the hand
of the American, at the same time casting an earnest glance into his
eyes, but, as before, too much overcome to speak.

I have done him wrong, self-reproachfully thought Captain Delano; his
apparent coldness has deceived me: in no instance has he meant to
offend.

Meantime, as if fearful that the continuance of the scene might too
much unstring his master, the servant seemed anxious to terminate it.
And so, still presenting himself as a crutch, and walking between the
two captains, he advanced with them towards the gangway; while still,
as if full of kindly contrition, Don Benito would not let go the hand
of Captain Delano, but retained it in his, across the black’s body.

Soon they were standing by the side, looking over into the boat, whose
crew turned up their curious eyes. Waiting a moment for the Spaniard to
relinquish his hold, the now embarrassed Captain Delano lifted his
foot, to overstep the threshold of the open gangway; but still Don
Benito would not let go his hand. And yet, with an agitated tone, he
said, “I can go no further; here I must bid you adieu. Adieu, my dear,
dear Don Amasa. Go—go!” suddenly tearing his hand loose, “go, and God
guard you better than me, my best friend.”

Not unaffected, Captain Delano would now have lingered; but catching
the meekly admonitory eye of the servant, with a hasty farewell he
descended into his boat, followed by the continual adieus of Don
Benito, standing rooted in the gangway.

Seating himself in the stern, Captain Delano, making a last salute,
ordered the boat shoved off. The crew had their oars on end. The
bowsmen pushed the boat a sufficient distance for the oars to be
lengthwise dropped. The instant that was done, Don Benito sprang over
the bulwarks, falling at the feet of Captain Delano; at the same time
calling towards his ship, but in tones so frenzied, that none in the
boat could understand him. But, as if not equally obtuse, three
sailors, from three different and distant parts of the ship, splashed
into the sea, swimming after their captain, as if intent upon his
rescue.

The dismayed officer of the boat eagerly asked what this meant. To
which, Captain Delano, turning a disdainful smile upon the
unaccountable Spaniard, answered that, for his part, he neither knew
nor cared; but it seemed as if Don Benito had taken it into his head to
produce the impression among his people that the boat wanted to kidnap
him. “Or else—give way for your lives,” he wildly added, starting at a
clattering hubbub in the ship, above which rang the tocsin of the
hatchet-polishers; and seizing Don Benito by the throat he added, “this
plotting pirate means murder!” Here, in apparent verification of the
words, the servant, a dagger in his hand, was seen on the rail
overhead, poised, in the act of leaping, as if with desperate fidelity
to befriend his master to the last; while, seemingly to aid the black,
the three white sailors were trying to clamber into the hampered bow.
Meantime, the whole host of negroes, as if inflamed at the sight of
their jeopardized captain, impended in one sooty avalanche over the
bulwarks.

All this, with what preceded, and what followed, occurred with such
involutions of rapidity, that past, present, and future seemed one.

Seeing the negro coming, Captain Delano had flung the Spaniard aside,
almost in the very act of clutching him, and, by the unconscious
recoil, shifting his place, with arms thrown up, so promptly grappled
the servant in his descent, that with dagger presented at Captain
Delano’s heart, the black seemed of purpose to have leaped there as to
his mark. But the weapon was wrenched away, and the assailant dashed
down into the bottom of the boat, which now, with disentangled oars,
began to speed through the sea.

At this juncture, the left hand of Captain Delano, on one side, again
clutched the half-reclined Don Benito, heedless that he was in a
speechless faint, while his right-foot, on the other side, ground the
prostrate negro; and his right arm pressed for added speed on the after
oar, his eye bent forward, encouraging his men to their utmost.

But here, the officer of the boat, who had at last succeeded in beating
off the towing sailors, and was now, with face turned aft, assisting
the bowsman at his oar, suddenly called to Captain Delano, to see what
the black was about; while a Portuguese oarsman shouted to him to give
heed to what the Spaniard was saying.

Glancing down at his feet, Captain Delano saw the freed hand of the
servant aiming with a second dagger—a small one, before concealed in
his wool—with this he was snakishly writhing up from the boat’s bottom,
at the heart of his master, his countenance lividly vindictive,
expressing the centred purpose of his soul; while the Spaniard,
half-choked, was vainly shrinking away, with husky words, incoherent to
all but the Portuguese.

That moment, across the long-benighted mind of Captain Delano, a flash
of revelation swept, illuminating, in unanticipated clearness, his
host’s whole mysterious demeanor, with every enigmatic event of the
day, as well as the entire past voyage of the San Dominick. He smote
Babo’s hand down, but his own heart smote him harder. With infinite
pity he withdrew his hold from Don Benito. Not Captain Delano, but Don
Benito, the black, in leaping into the boat, had intended to stab.

Both the black’s hands were held, as, glancing up towards the San
Dominick, Captain Delano, now with scales dropped from his eyes, saw
the negroes, not in misrule, not in tumult, not as if frantically
concerned for Don Benito, but with mask torn away, flourishing hatchets
and knives, in ferocious piratical revolt. Like delirious black
dervishes, the six Ashantees danced on the poop. Prevented by their
foes from springing into the water, the Spanish boys were hurrying up
to the topmost spars, while such of the few Spanish sailors, not
already in the sea, less alert, were descried, helplessly mixed in, on
deck, with the blacks.

Meantime Captain Delano hailed his own vessel, ordering the ports up,
and the guns run out. But by this time the cable of the San Dominick
had been cut; and the fag-end, in lashing out, whipped away the canvas
shroud about the beak, suddenly revealing, as the bleached hull swung
round towards the open ocean, death for the figure-head, in a human
skeleton; chalky comment on the chalked words below, “_Follow your
leader_.”

At the sight, Don Benito, covering his face, wailed out: “’Tis he,
Aranda! my murdered, unburied friend!”

Upon reaching the sealer, calling for ropes, Captain Delano bound the
negro, who made no resistance, and had him hoisted to the deck. He
would then have assisted the now almost helpless Don Benito up the
side; but Don Benito, wan as he was, refused to move, or be moved,
until the negro should have been first put below out of view. When,
presently assured that it was done, he no more shrank from the ascent.

The boat was immediately dispatched back to pick up the three swimming
sailors. Meantime, the guns were in readiness, though, owing to the San
Dominick having glided somewhat astern of the sealer, only the
aftermost one could be brought to bear. With this, they fired six
times; thinking to cripple the fugitive ship by bringing down her
spars. But only a few inconsiderable ropes were shot away. Soon the
ship was beyond the gun’s range, steering broad out of the bay; the
blacks thickly clustering round the bowsprit, one moment with taunting
cries towards the whites, the next with upthrown gestures hailing the
now dusky moors of ocean—cawing crows escaped from the hand of the
fowler.

The first impulse was to slip the cables and give chase. But, upon
second thoughts, to pursue with whale-boat and yawl seemed more
promising.

Upon inquiring of Don Benito what firearms they had on board the San
Dominick, Captain Delano was answered that they had none that could be
used; because, in the earlier stages of the mutiny, a cabin-passenger,
since dead, had secretly put out of order the locks of what few muskets
there were. But with all his remaining strength, Don Benito entreated
the American not to give chase, either with ship or boat; for the
negroes had already proved themselves such desperadoes, that, in case
of a present assault, nothing but a total massacre of the whites could
be looked for. But, regarding this warning as coming from one whose
spirit had been crushed by misery the American did not give up his
design.

The boats were got ready and armed. Captain Delano ordered his men into
them. He was going himself when Don Benito grasped his arm.

“What! have you saved my life, Señor, and are you now going to throw
away your own?”

The officers also, for reasons connected with their interests and those
of the voyage, and a duty owing to the owners, strongly objected
against their commander’s going. Weighing their remonstrances a moment,
Captain Delano felt bound to remain; appointing his chief mate—an
athletic and resolute man, who had been a privateer’s-man—to head the
party. The more to encourage the sailors, they were told, that the
Spanish captain considered his ship good as lost; that she and her
cargo, including some gold and silver, were worth more than a thousand
doubloons. Take her, and no small part should be theirs. The sailors
replied with a shout.

The fugitives had now almost gained an offing. It was nearly night; but
the moon was rising. After hard, prolonged pulling, the boats came up
on the ship’s quarters, at a suitable distance laying upon their oars
to discharge their muskets. Having no bullets to return, the negroes
sent their yells. But, upon the second volley, Indian-like, they
hurtled their hatchets. One took off a sailor’s fingers. Another struck
the whale-boat’s bow, cutting off the rope there, and remaining stuck
in the gunwale like a woodman’s axe. Snatching it, quivering from its
lodgment, the mate hurled it back. The returned gauntlet now stuck in
the ship’s broken quarter-gallery, and so remained.

The negroes giving too hot a reception, the whites kept a more
respectful distance. Hovering now just out of reach of the hurtling
hatchets, they, with a view to the close encounter which must soon
come, sought to decoy the blacks into entirely disarming themselves of
their most murderous weapons in a hand-to-hand fight, by foolishly
flinging them, as missiles, short of the mark, into the sea. But, ere
long, perceiving the stratagem, the negroes desisted, though not before
many of them had to replace their lost hatchets with handspikes; an
exchange which, as counted upon, proved, in the end, favorable to the
assailants.

Meantime, with a strong wind, the ship still clove the water; the boats
alternately falling behind, and pulling up, to discharge fresh volleys.

The fire was mostly directed towards the stern, since there, chiefly,
the negroes, at present, were clustering. But to kill or maim the
negroes was not the object. To take them, with the ship, was the
object. To do it, the ship must be boarded; which could not be done by
boats while she was sailing so fast.

A thought now struck the mate. Observing the Spanish boys still aloft,
high as they could get, he called to them to descend to the yards, and
cut adrift the sails. It was done. About this time, owing to causes
hereafter to be shown, two Spaniards, in the dress of sailors, and
conspicuously showing themselves, were killed; not by volleys, but by
deliberate marksman’s shots; while, as it afterwards appeared, by one
of the general discharges, Atufal, the black, and the Spaniard at the
helm likewise were killed. What now, with the loss of the sails, and
loss of leaders, the ship became unmanageable to the negroes.

With creaking masts, she came heavily round to the wind; the prow
slowly swinging into view of the boats, its skeleton gleaming in the
horizontal moonlight, and casting a gigantic ribbed shadow upon the
water. One extended arm of the ghost seemed beckoning the whites to
avenge it.

“Follow your leader!” cried the mate; and, one on each bow, the boats
boarded. Sealing-spears and cutlasses crossed hatchets and hand-spikes.
Huddled upon the long-boat amidships, the negresses raised a wailing
chant, whose chorus was the clash of the steel.

For a time, the attack wavered; the negroes wedging themselves to beat
it back; the half-repelled sailors, as yet unable to gain a footing,
fighting as troopers in the saddle, one leg sideways flung over the
bulwarks, and one without, plying their cutlasses like carters’ whips.
But in vain. They were almost overborne, when, rallying themselves into
a squad as one man, with a huzza, they sprang inboard, where,
entangled, they involuntarily separated again. For a few breaths’
space, there was a vague, muffled, inner sound, as of submerged
sword-fish rushing hither and thither through shoals of black-fish.
Soon, in a reunited band, and joined by the Spanish seamen, the whites
came to the surface, irresistibly driving the negroes toward the stern.
But a barricade of casks and sacks, from side to side, had been thrown
up by the main-mast. Here the negroes faced about, and though scorning
peace or truce, yet fain would have had respite. But, without pause,
overleaping the barrier, the unflagging sailors again closed.
Exhausted, the blacks now fought in despair. Their red tongues lolled,
wolf-like, from their black mouths. But the pale sailors’ teeth were
set; not a word was spoken; and, in five minutes more, the ship was
won.

Nearly a score of the negroes were killed. Exclusive of those by the
balls, many were mangled; their wounds—mostly inflicted by the
long-edged sealing-spears, resembling those shaven ones of the English
at Preston Pans, made by the poled scythes of the Highlanders. On the
other side, none were killed, though several were wounded; some
severely, including the mate. The surviving negroes were temporarily
secured, and the ship, towed back into the harbor at midnight, once
more lay anchored.

Omitting the incidents and arrangements ensuing, suffice it that, after
two days spent in refitting, the ships sailed in company for
Conception, in Chili, and thence for Lima, in Peru; where, before the
vice-regal courts, the whole affair, from the beginning, underwent
investigation.

Though, midway on the passage, the ill-fated Spaniard, relaxed from
constraint, showed some signs of regaining health with free-will; yet,
agreeably to his own foreboding, shortly before arriving at Lima, he
relapsed, finally becoming so reduced as to be carried ashore in arms.
Hearing of his story and plight, one of the many religious institutions
of the City of Kings opened an hospitable refuge to him, where both
physician and priest were his nurses, and a member of the order
volunteered to be his one special guardian and consoler, by night and
by day.

The following extracts, translated from one of the official Spanish
documents, will, it is hoped, shed light on the preceding narrative, as
well as, in the first place, reveal the true port of departure and true
history of the San Dominick’s voyage, down to the time of her touching
at the island of St. Maria.

But, ere the extracts come, it may be well to preface them with a
remark.

The document selected, from among many others, for partial translation,
contains the deposition of Benito Cereno; the first taken in the case.
Some disclosures therein were, at the time, held dubious for both
learned and natural reasons. The tribunal inclined to the opinion that
the deponent, not undisturbed in his mind by recent events, raved of
some things which could never have happened. But subsequent depositions
of the surviving sailors, bearing out the revelations of their captain
in several of the strangest particulars, gave credence to the rest. So
that the tribunal, in its final decision, rested its capital sentences
upon statements which, had they lacked confirmation, it would have
deemed it but duty to reject.


I, DON JOSE DE ABOS AND PADILLA, His Majesty’s Notary for the Royal
Revenue, and Register of this Province, and Notary Public of the Holy
Crusade of this Bishopric, etc.

Do certify and declare, as much as is requisite in law, that, in the
criminal cause commenced the twenty-fourth of the month of September,
in the year seventeen hundred and ninety-nine, against the negroes of
the ship San Dominick, the following declaration before me was made:

_Declaration of the first witness_, DON BENITO CERENO.


The same day, and month, and year, His Honor, Doctor Juan Martinez de
Rozas, Councilor of the Royal Audience of this Kingdom, and learned in
the law of this Intendency, ordered the captain of the ship San
Dominick, Don Benito Cereno, to appear; which he did, in his litter,
attended by the monk Infelez; of whom he received the oath, which he
took by God, our Lord, and a sign of the Cross; under which he promised
to tell the truth of whatever he should know and should be asked;—and
being interrogated agreeably to the tenor of the act commencing the
process, he said, that on the twentieth of May last, he set sail with
his ship from the port of Valparaiso, bound to that of Callao; loaded
with the produce of the country beside thirty cases of hardware and one
hundred and sixty blacks, of both sexes, mostly belonging to Don
Alexandro Aranda, gentleman, of the city of Mendoza; that the crew of
the ship consisted of thirty-six men, beside the persons who went as
passengers; that the negroes were in part as follows:

[_Here, in the original, follows a list of some fifty names,
descriptions, and ages, compiled from certain recovered documents of
Aranda’s, and also from recollections of the deponent, from which
portions only are extracted._]


—One, from about eighteen to nineteen years, named José, and this was
the man that waited upon his master, Don Alexandro, and who speaks well
the Spanish, having served him four or five years; * * * a mulatto,
named Francesco, the cabin steward, of a good person and voice, having
sung in the Valparaiso churches, native of the province of Buenos
Ayres, aged about thirty-five years. * * * A smart negro, named Dago,
who had been for many years a grave-digger among the Spaniards, aged
forty-six years. * * * Four old negroes, born in Africa, from sixty to
seventy, but sound, calkers by trade, whose names are as follows:—the
first was named Muri, and he was killed (as was also his son named
Diamelo); the second, Nacta; the third, Yola, likewise killed; the
fourth, Ghofan; and six full-grown negroes, aged from thirty to
forty-five, all raw, and born among the Ashantees—Matiluqui, Yan,
Leche, Mapenda, Yambaio, Akim; four of whom were killed; * * * a
powerful negro named Atufal, who being supposed to have been a chief in
Africa, his owner set great store by him. * * * And a small negro of
Senegal, but some years among the Spaniards, aged about thirty, which
negro’s name was Babo; * * * that he does not remember the names of the
others, but that still expecting the residue of Don Alexandra’s papers
will be found, will then take due account of them all, and remit to the
court; * * * and thirty-nine women and children of all ages.

[_The catalogue over, the deposition goes on_]


* * * That all the negroes slept upon deck, as is customary in this
navigation, and none wore fetters, because the owner, his friend
Aranda, told him that they were all tractable; * * * that on the
seventh day after leaving port, at three o’clock in the morning, all
the Spaniards being asleep except the two officers on the watch, who
were the boatswain, Juan Robles, and the carpenter, Juan Bautista
Gayete, and the helmsman and his boy, the negroes revolted suddenly,
wounded dangerously the boatswain and the carpenter, and successively
killed eighteen men of those who were sleeping upon deck, some with
hand-spikes and hatchets, and others by throwing them alive overboard,
after tying them; that of the Spaniards upon deck, they left about
seven, as he thinks, alive and tied, to manoeuvre the ship, and three
or four more, who hid themselves, remained also alive. Although in the
act of revolt the negroes made themselves masters of the hatchway, six
or seven wounded went through it to the cockpit, without any hindrance
on their part; that during the act of revolt, the mate and another
person, whose name he does not recollect, attempted to come up through
the hatchway, but being quickly wounded, were obliged to return to the
cabin; that the deponent resolved at break of day to come up the
companion-way, where the negro Babo was, being the ringleader, and
Atufal, who assisted him, and having spoken to them, exhorted them to
cease committing such atrocities, asking them, at the same time, what
they wanted and intended to do, offering, himself, to obey their
commands; that notwithstanding this, they threw, in his presence, three
men, alive and tied, overboard; that they told the deponent to come up,
and that they would not kill him; which having done, the negro Babo
asked him whether there were in those seas any negro countries where
they might be carried, and he answered them, No; that the negro Babo
afterwards told him to carry them to Senegal, or to the neighboring
islands of St. Nicholas; and he answered, that this was impossible, on
account of the great distance, the necessity involved of rounding Cape
Horn, the bad condition of the vessel, the want of provisions, sails,
and water; but that the negro Babo replied to him he must carry them in
any way; that they would do and conform themselves to everything the
deponent should require as to eating and drinking; that after a long
conference, being absolutely compelled to please them, for they
threatened to kill all the whites if they were not, at all events,
carried to Senegal, he told them that what was most wanting for the
voyage was water; that they would go near the coast to take it, and
thence they would proceed on their course; that the negro Babo agreed
to it; and the deponent steered towards the intermediate ports, hoping
to meet some Spanish, or foreign vessel that would save them; that
within ten or eleven days they saw the land, and continued their course
by it in the vicinity of Nasca; that the deponent observed that the
negroes were now restless and mutinous, because he did not effect the
taking in of water, the negro Babo having required, with threats, that
it should be done, without fail, the following day; he told him he saw
plainly that the coast was steep, and the rivers designated in the maps
were not to be found, with other reasons suitable to the circumstances;
that the best way would be to go to the island of Santa Maria, where
they might water easily, it being a solitary island, as the foreigners
did; that the deponent did not go to Pisco, that was near, nor make any
other port of the coast, because the negro Babo had intimated to him
several times, that he would kill all the whites the very moment he
should perceive any city, town, or settlement of any kind on the shores
to which they should be carried: that having determined to go to the
island of Santa Maria, as the deponent had planned, for the purpose of
trying whether, on the passage or near the island itself, they could
find any vessel that should favor them, or whether he could escape from
it in a boat to the neighboring coast of Arruco, to adopt the necessary
means he immediately changed his course, steering for the island; that
the negroes Babo and Atufal held daily conferences, in which they
discussed what was necessary for their design of returning to Senegal,
whether they were to kill all the Spaniards, and particularly the
deponent; that eight days after parting from the coast of Nasca, the
deponent being on the watch a little after day-break, and soon after
the negroes had their meeting, the negro Babo came to the place where
the deponent was, and told him that he had determined to kill his
master, Don Alexandro Aranda, both because he and his companions could
not otherwise be sure of their liberty, and that to keep the seamen in
subjection, he wanted to prepare a warning of what road they should be
made to take did they or any of them oppose him; and that, by means of
the death of Don Alexandro, that warning would best be given; but, that
what this last meant, the deponent did not at the time comprehend, nor
could not, further than that the death of Don Alexandro was intended;
and moreover the negro Babo proposed to the deponent to call the mate
Raneds, who was sleeping in the cabin, before the thing was done, for
fear, as the deponent understood it, that the mate, who was a good
navigator, should be killed with Don Alexandro and the rest; that the
deponent, who was the friend, from youth, of Don Alexandro, prayed and
conjured, but all was useless; for the negro Babo answered him that the
thing could not be prevented, and that all the Spaniards risked their
death if they should attempt to frustrate his will in this matter, or
any other; that, in this conflict, the deponent called the mate,
Raneds, who was forced to go apart, and immediately the negro Babo
commanded the Ashantee Martinqui and the Ashantee Lecbe to go and
commit the murder; that those two went down with hatchets to the berth
of Don Alexandro; that, yet half alive and mangled, they dragged him on
deck; that they were going to throw him overboard in that state, but
the negro Babo stopped them, bidding the murder be completed on the
deck before him, which was done, when, by his orders, the body was
carried below, forward; that nothing more was seen of it by the
deponent for three days; * * * that Don Alonzo Sidonia, an old man,
long resident at Valparaiso, and lately appointed to a civil office in
Peru, whither he had taken passage, was at the time sleeping in the
berth opposite Don Alexandro’s; that awakening at his cries, surprised
by them, and at the sight of the negroes with their bloody hatchets in
their hands, he threw himself into the sea through a window which was
near him, and was drowned, without it being in the power of the
deponent to assist or take him up; * * * that a short time after
killing Aranda, they brought upon deck his german-cousin, of
middle-age, Don Francisco Masa, of Mendoza, and the young Don Joaquin,
Marques de Aramboalaza, then lately from Spain, with his Spanish
servant Ponce, and the three young clerks of Aranda, José Mozairi
Lorenzo Bargas, and Hermenegildo Gandix, all of Cadiz; that Don Joaquin
and Hermenegildo Gandix, the negro Babo, for purposes hereafter to
appear, preserved alive; but Don Francisco Masa, José Mozairi, and
Lorenzo Bargas, with Ponce the servant, beside the boatswain, Juan
Robles, the boatswain’s mates, Manuel Viscaya and Roderigo Hurta, and
four of the sailors, the negro Babo ordered to be thrown alive into the
sea, although they made no resistance, nor begged for anything else but
mercy; that the boatswain, Juan Robles, who knew how to swim, kept the
longest above water, making acts of contrition, and, in the last words
he uttered, charged this deponent to cause mass to be said for his soul
to our Lady of Succor: * * * that, during the three days which
followed, the deponent, uncertain what fate had befallen the remains of
Don Alexandro, frequently asked the negro Babo where they were, and, if
still on board, whether they were to be preserved for interment ashore,
entreating him so to order it; that the negro Babo answered nothing
till the fourth day, when at sunrise, the deponent coming on deck, the
negro Babo showed him a skeleton, which had been substituted for the
ship’s proper figure-head—the image of Christopher Colon, the
discoverer of the New World; that the negro Babo asked him whose
skeleton that was, and whether, from its whiteness, he should not think
it a white’s; that, upon discovering his face, the negro Babo, coming
close, said words to this effect: “Keep faith with the blacks from here
to Senegal, or you shall in spirit, as now in body, follow your
leader,” pointing to the prow; * * * that the same morning the negro
Babo took by succession each Spaniard forward, and asked him whose
skeleton that was, and whether, from its whiteness, he should not think
it a white’s; that each Spaniard covered his face; that then to each
the negro Babo repeated the words in the first place said to the
deponent; * * * that they (the Spaniards), being then assembled aft,
the negro Babo harangued them, saying that he had now done all; that
the deponent (as navigator for the negroes) might pursue his course,
warning him and all of them that they should, soul and body, go the way
of Don Alexandro, if he saw them (the Spaniards) speak, or plot
anything against them (the negroes)—a threat which was repeated every
day; that, before the events last mentioned, they had tied the cook to
throw him overboard, for it is not known what thing they heard him
speak, but finally the negro Babo spared his life, at the request of
the deponent; that a few days after, the deponent, endeavoring not to
omit any means to preserve the lives of the remaining whites, spoke to
the negroes peace and tranquillity, and agreed to draw up a paper,
signed by the deponent and the sailors who could write, as also by the
negro Babo, for himself and all the blacks, in which the deponent
obliged himself to carry them to Senegal, and they not to kill any
more, and he formally to make over to them the ship, with the cargo,
with which they were for that time satisfied and quieted. * * But the
next day, the more surely to guard against the sailors’ escape, the
negro Babo commanded all the boats to be destroyed but the long-boat,
which was unseaworthy, and another, a cutter in good condition, which
knowing it would yet be wanted for towing the water casks, he had it
lowered down into the hold.


[_Various particulars of the prolonged and perplexed navigation ensuing
here follow, with incidents of a calamitous calm, from which portion
one passage is extracted, to wit_:]


—That on the fifth day of the calm, all on board suffering much from
the heat, and want of water, and five having died in fits, and mad, the
negroes became irritable, and for a chance gesture, which they deemed
suspicious—though it was harmless—made by the mate, Raneds, to the
deponent in the act of handing a quadrant, they killed him; but that
for this they afterwards were sorry, the mate being the only remaining
navigator on board, except the deponent.


—That omitting other events, which daily happened, and which can only
serve uselessly to recall past misfortunes and conflicts, after
seventy-three days’ navigation, reckoned from the time they sailed from
Nasca, during which they navigated under a scanty allowance of water,
and were afflicted with the calms before mentioned, they at last
arrived at the island of Santa Maria, on the seventeenth of the month
of August, at about six o’clock in the afternoon, at which hour they
cast anchor very near the American ship, Bachelor’s Delight, which lay
in the same bay, commanded by the generous Captain Amasa Delano; but at
six o’clock in the morning, they had already descried the port, and the
negroes became uneasy, as soon as at distance they saw the ship, not
having expected to see one there; that the negro Babo pacified them,
assuring them that no fear need be had; that straightway he ordered the
figure on the bow to be covered with canvas, as for repairs and had the
decks a little set in order; that for a time the negro Babo and the
negro Atufal conferred; that the negro Atufal was for sailing away, but
the negro Babo would not, and, by himself, cast about what to do; that
at last he came to the deponent, proposing to him to say and do all
that the deponent declares to have said and done to the American
captain; * * * * * * * that the negro Babo warned him that if he varied
in the least, or uttered any word, or gave any look that should give
the least intimation of the past events or present state, he would
instantly kill him, with all his companions, showing a dagger, which he
carried hid, saying something which, as he understood it, meant that
that dagger would be alert as his eye; that the negro Babo then
announced the plan to all his companions, which pleased them; that he
then, the better to disguise the truth, devised many expedients, in
some of them uniting deceit and defense; that of this sort was the
device of the six Ashantees before named, who were his bravoes; that
them he stationed on the break of the poop, as if to clean certain
hatchets (in cases, which were part of the cargo), but in reality to
use them, and distribute them at need, and at a given word he told
them; that, among other devices, was the device of presenting Atufal,
his right hand man, as chained, though in a moment the chains could be
dropped; that in every particular he informed the deponent what part he
was expected to enact in every device, and what story he was to tell on
every occasion, always threatening him with instant death if he varied
in the least: that, conscious that many of the negroes would be
turbulent, the negro Babo appointed the four aged negroes, who were
calkers, to keep what domestic order they could on the decks; that
again and again he harangued the Spaniards and his companions,
informing them of his intent, and of his devices, and of the invented
story that this deponent was to tell; charging them lest any of them
varied from that story; that these arrangements were made and matured
during the interval of two or three hours, between their first sighting
the ship and the arrival on board of Captain Amasa Delano; that this
happened about half-past seven o’clock in the morning, Captain Amasa
Delano coming in his boat, and all gladly receiving him; that the
deponent, as well as he could force himself, acting then the part of
principal owner, and a free captain of the ship, told Captain Amasa
Delano, when called upon, that he came from Buenos Ayres, bound to
Lima, with three hundred negroes; that off Cape Horn, and in a
subsequent fever, many negroes had died; that also, by similar
casualties, all the sea officers and the greatest part of the crew had
died.


[_And so the deposition goes on, circumstantially recounting the
fictitious story dictated to the deponent by Babo, and through the
deponent imposed upon Captain Delano; and also recounting the friendly
offers of Captain Delano, with other things, but all of which is here
omitted. After the fictitious story, etc. the deposition proceeds_:]


—that the generous Captain Amasa Delano remained on board all the day,
till he left the ship anchored at six o’clock in the evening, deponent
speaking to him always of his pretended misfortunes, under the
fore-mentioned principles, without having had it in his power to tell a
single word, or give him the least hint, that he might know the truth
and state of things; because the negro Babo, performing the office of
an officious servant with all the appearance of submission of the
humble slave, did not leave the deponent one moment; that this was in
order to observe the deponent’s actions and words, for the negro Babo
understands well the Spanish; and besides, there were thereabout some
others who were constantly on the watch, and likewise understood the
Spanish; * * * that upon one occasion, while deponent was standing on
the deck conversing with Amasa Delano, by a secret sign the negro Babo
drew him (the deponent) aside, the act appearing as if originating with
the deponent; that then, he being drawn aside, the negro Babo proposed
to him to gain from Amasa Delano full particulars about his ship, and
crew, and arms; that the deponent asked “For what?” that the negro Babo
answered he might conceive; that, grieved at the prospect of what might
overtake the generous Captain Amasa Delano, the deponent at first
refused to ask the desired questions, and used every argument to induce
the negro Babo to give up this new design; that the negro Babo showed
the point of his dagger; that, after the information had been obtained
the negro Babo again drew him aside, telling him that that very night
he (the deponent) would be captain of two ships, instead of one, for
that, great part of the American’s ship’s crew being to be absent
fishing, the six Ashantees, without any one else, would easily take it;
that at this time he said other things to the same purpose; that no
entreaties availed; that, before Amasa Delano’s coming on board, no
hint had been given touching the capture of the American ship: that to
prevent this project the deponent was powerless; * * *—that in some
things his memory is confused, he cannot distinctly recall every event;
* * *—that as soon as they had cast anchor at six of the clock in the
evening, as has before been stated, the American Captain took leave, to
return to his vessel; that upon a sudden impulse, which the deponent
believes to have come from God and his angels, he, after the farewell
had been said, followed the generous Captain Amasa Delano as far as the
gunwale, where he stayed, under pretense of taking leave, until Amasa
Delano should have been seated in his boat; that on shoving off, the
deponent sprang from the gunwale into the boat, and fell into it, he
knows not how, God guarding him; that—


[_Here, in the original, follows the account of what further happened
at the escape, and how the San Dominick was retaken, and of the passage
to the coast; including in the recital many expressions of “eternal
gratitude” to the “generous Captain Amasa Delano.” The deposition then
proceeds with recapitulatory remarks, and a partial renumeration of the
negroes, making record of their individual part in the past events,
with a view to furnishing, according to command of the court, the data
whereon to found the criminal sentences to be pronounced. From this
portion is the following_;]


—That he believes that all the negroes, though not in the first place
knowing to the design of revolt, when it was accomplished, approved it.
* * * That the negro, José, eighteen years old, and in the personal
service of Don Alexandro, was the one who communicated the information
to the negro Babo, about the state of things in the cabin, before the
revolt; that this is known, because, in the preceding midnight, he use
to come from his berth, which was under his master’s, in the cabin, to
the deck where the ringleader and his associates were, and had secret
conversations with the negro Babo, in which he was several times seen
by the mate; that, one night, the mate drove him away twice; * * that
this same negro José was the one who, without being commanded to do so
by the negro Babo, as Lecbe and Martinqui were, stabbed his master, Don
Alexandro, after he had been dragged half-lifeless to the deck; * *
that the mulatto steward, Francesco, was of the first band of
revolters, that he was, in all things, the creature and tool of the
negro Babo; that, to make his court, he, just before a repast in the
cabin, proposed, to the negro Babo, poisoning a dish for the generous
Captain Amasa Delano; this is known and believed, because the negroes
have said it; but that the negro Babo, having another design, forbade
Francesco; * * that the Ashantee Lecbe was one of the worst of them;
for that, on the day the ship was retaken, he assisted in the defense
of her, with a hatchet in each hand, with one of which he wounded, in
the breast, the chief mate of Amasa Delano, in the first act of
boarding; this all knew; that, in sight of the deponent, Lecbe struck,
with a hatchet, Don Francisco Masa, when, by the negro Babo’s orders,
he was carrying him to throw him overboard, alive, beside participating
in the murder, before mentioned, of Don Alexandro Aranda, and others of
the cabin-passengers; that, owing to the fury with which the Ashantees
fought in the engagement with the boats, but this Lecbe and Yan
survived; that Yan was bad as Lecbe; that Yan was the man who, by
Babo’s command, willingly prepared the skeleton of Don Alexandro, in a
way the negroes afterwards told the deponent, but which he, so long as
reason is left him, can never divulge; that Yan and Lecbe were the two
who, in a calm by night, riveted the skeleton to the bow; this also the
negroes told him; that the negro Babo was he who traced the inscription
below it; that the negro Babo was the plotter from first to last; he
ordered every murder, and was the helm and keel of the revolt; that
Atufal was his lieutenant in all; but Atufal, with his own hand,
committed no murder; nor did the negro Babo; * * that Atufal was shot,
being killed in the fight with the boats, ere boarding; * * that the
negresses, of age, were knowing to the revolt, and testified themselves
satisfied at the death of their master, Don Alexandro; that, had the
negroes not restrained them, they would have tortured to death, instead
of simply killing, the Spaniards slain by command of the negro Babo;
that the negresses used their utmost influence to have the deponent
made away with; that, in the various acts of murder, they sang songs
and danced—not gaily, but solemnly; and before the engagement with the
boats, as well as during the action, they sang melancholy songs to the
negroes, and that this melancholy tone was more inflaming than a
different one would have been, and was so intended; that all this is
believed, because the negroes have said it.—that of the thirty-six men
of the crew, exclusive of the passengers (all of whom are now dead),
which the deponent had knowledge of, six only remained alive, with four
cabin-boys and ship-boys, not included with the crew; * *—that the
negroes broke an arm of one of the cabin-boys and gave him strokes with
hatchets.

[_Then follow various random disclosures referring to various periods
of time. The following are extracted_;]


—That during the presence of Captain Amasa Delano on board, some
attempts were made by the sailors, and one by Hermenegildo Gandix, to
convey hints to him of the true state of affairs; but that these
attempts were ineffectual, owing to fear of incurring death, and,
futhermore, owing to the devices which offered contradictions to the
true state of affairs, as well as owing to the generosity and piety of
Amasa Delano incapable of sounding such wickedness; * * * that Luys
Galgo, a sailor about sixty years of age, and formerly of the king’s
navy, was one of those who sought to convey tokens to Captain Amasa
Delano; but his intent, though undiscovered, being suspected, he was,
on a pretense, made to retire out of sight, and at last into the hold,
and there was made away with. This the negroes have since said; * * *
that one of the ship-boys feeling, from Captain Amasa Delano’s
presence, some hopes of release, and not having enough prudence,
dropped some chance-word respecting his expectations, which being
overheard and understood by a slave-boy with whom he was eating at the
time, the latter struck him on the head with a knife, inflicting a bad
wound, but of which the boy is now healing; that likewise, not long
before the ship was brought to anchor, one of the seamen, steering at
the time, endangered himself by letting the blacks remark some
expression in his countenance, arising from a cause similar to the
above; but this sailor, by his heedful after conduct, escaped; * * *
that these statements are made to show the court that from the
beginning to the end of the revolt, it was impossible for the deponent
and his men to act otherwise than they did; * * *—that the third clerk,
Hermenegildo Gandix, who before had been forced to live among the
seamen, wearing a seaman’s habit, and in all respects appearing to be
one for the time; he, Gandix, was killed by a musket ball fired through
mistake from the boats before boarding; having in his fright run up the
mizzen-rigging, calling to the boats—“don’t board,” lest upon their
boarding the negroes should kill him; that this inducing the Americans
to believe he some way favored the cause of the negroes, they fired two
balls at him, so that he fell wounded from the rigging, and was drowned
in the sea; * * *—that the young Don Joaquin, Marques de Aramboalaza,
like Hermenegildo Gandix, the third clerk, was degraded to the office
and appearance of a common seaman; that upon one occasion when Don
Joaquin shrank, the negro Babo commanded the Ashantee Lecbe to take tar
and heat it, and pour it upon Don Joaquin’s hands; * * *—that Don
Joaquin was killed owing to another mistake of the Americans, but one
impossible to be avoided, as upon the approach of the boats, Don
Joaquin, with a hatchet tied edge out and upright to his hand, was made
by the negroes to appear on the bulwarks; whereupon, seen with arms in
his hands and in a questionable attitude, he was shot for a renegade
seaman; * * *—that on the person of Don Joaquin was found secreted a
jewel, which, by papers that were discovered, proved to have been meant
for the shrine of our Lady of Mercy in Lima; a votive offering,
beforehand prepared and guarded, to attest his gratitude, when he
should have landed in Peru, his last destination, for the safe
conclusion of his entire voyage from Spain; * * *—that the jewel, with
the other effects of the late Don Joaquin, is in the custody of the
brethren of the Hospital de Sacerdotes, awaiting the disposition of the
honorable court; * * *—that, owing to the condition of the deponent, as
well as the haste in which the boats departed for the attack, the
Americans were not forewarned that there were, among the apparent crew,
a passenger and one of the clerks disguised by the negro Babo; * *
*—that, beside the negroes killed in the action, some were killed after
the capture and re-anchoring at night, when shackled to the ring-bolts
on deck; that these deaths were committed by the sailors, ere they
could be prevented. That so soon as informed of it, Captain Amasa
Delano used all his authority, and, in particular with his own hand,
struck down Martinez Gola, who, having found a razor in the pocket of
an old jacket of his, which one of the shackled negroes had on, was
aiming it at the negro’s throat; that the noble Captain Amasa Delano
also wrenched from the hand of Bartholomew Barlo a dagger, secreted at
the time of the massacre of the whites, with which he was in the act of
stabbing a shackled negro, who, the same day, with another negro, had
thrown him down and jumped upon him; * * *—that, for all the events,
befalling through so long a time, during which the ship was in the
hands of the negro Babo, he cannot here give account; but that, what he
has said is the most substantial of what occurs to him at present, and
is the truth under the oath which he has taken; which declaration he
affirmed and ratified, after hearing it read to him.

He said that he is twenty-nine years of age, and broken in body and
mind; that when finally dismissed by the court, he shall not return
home to Chili, but betake himself to the monastery on Mount Agonia
without; and signed with his honor, and crossed himself, and, for the
time, departed as he came, in his litter, with the monk Infelez, to the
Hospital de Sacerdotes.

BENITO CERENO.


DOCTOR ROZAS.


If the Deposition have served as the key to fit into the lock of the
complications which precede it, then, as a vault whose door has been
flung back, the San Dominick’s hull lies open to-day.

Hitherto the nature of this narrative, besides rendering the
intricacies in the beginning unavoidable, has more or less required
that many things, instead of being set down in the order of occurrence,
should be retrospectively, or irregularly given; this last is the case
with the following passages, which will conclude the account:

During the long, mild voyage to Lima, there was, as before hinted, a
period during which the sufferer a little recovered his health, or, at
least in some degree, his tranquillity. Ere the decided relapse which
came, the two captains had many cordial conversations—their fraternal
unreserve in singular contrast with former withdrawments.

Again and again it was repeated, how hard it had been to enact the part
forced on the Spaniard by Babo.

“Ah, my dear friend,” Don Benito once said, “at those very times when
you thought me so morose and ungrateful, nay, when, as you now admit,
you half thought me plotting your murder, at those very times my heart
was frozen; I could not look at you, thinking of what, both on board
this ship and your own, hung, from other hands, over my kind
benefactor. And as God lives, Don Amasa, I know not whether desire for
my own safety alone could have nerved me to that leap into your boat,
had it not been for the thought that, did you, unenlightened, return to
your ship, you, my best friend, with all who might be with you, stolen
upon, that night, in your hammocks, would never in this world have
wakened again. Do but think how you walked this deck, how you sat in
this cabin, every inch of ground mined into honey-combs under you. Had
I dropped the least hint, made the least advance towards an
understanding between us, death, explosive death—yours as mine—would
have ended the scene.”

“True, true,” cried Captain Delano, starting, “you have saved my life,
Don Benito, more than I yours; saved it, too, against my knowledge and
will.”

“Nay, my friend,” rejoined the Spaniard, courteous even to the point of
religion, “God charmed your life, but you saved mine. To think of some
things you did—those smilings and chattings, rash pointings and
gesturings. For less than these, they slew my mate, Raneds; but you had
the Prince of Heaven’s safe-conduct through all ambuscades.”

“Yes, all is owing to Providence, I know: but the temper of my mind
that morning was more than commonly pleasant, while the sight of so
much suffering, more apparent than real, added to my good-nature,
compassion, and charity, happily interweaving the three. Had it been
otherwise, doubtless, as you hint, some of my interferences might have
ended unhappily enough. Besides, those feelings I spoke of enabled me
to get the better of momentary distrust, at times when acuteness might
have cost me my life, without saving another’s. Only at the end did my
suspicions get the better of me, and you know how wide of the mark they
then proved.”

“Wide, indeed,” said Don Benito, sadly; “you were with me all day;
stood with me, sat with me, talked with me, looked at me, ate with me,
drank with me; and yet, your last act was to clutch for a monster, not
only an innocent man, but the most pitiable of all men. To such degree
may malign machinations and deceptions impose. So far may even the best
man err, in judging the conduct of one with the recesses of whose
condition he is not acquainted. But you were forced to it; and you were
in time undeceived. Would that, in both respects, it was so ever, and
with all men.”

“You generalize, Don Benito; and mournfully enough. But the past is
passed; why moralize upon it? Forget it. See, yon bright sun has
forgotten it all, and the blue sea, and the blue sky; these have turned
over new leaves.”

“Because they have no memory,” he dejectedly replied; “because they are
not human.”

“But these mild trades that now fan your cheek, do they not come with a
human-like healing to you? Warm friends, steadfast friends are the
trades.”

“With their steadfastness they but waft me to my tomb, Señor,” was the
foreboding response.

“You are saved,” cried Captain Delano, more and more astonished and
pained; “you are saved: what has cast such a shadow upon you?”

“The negro.”

There was silence, while the moody man sat, slowly and unconsciously
gathering his mantle about him, as if it were a pall.

There was no more conversation that day.

But if the Spaniard’s melancholy sometimes ended in muteness upon
topics like the above, there were others upon which he never spoke at
all; on which, indeed, all his old reserves were piled. Pass over the
worst, and, only to elucidate let an item or two of these be cited. The
dress, so precise and costly, worn by him on the day whose events have
been narrated, had not willingly been put on. And that silver-mounted
sword, apparent symbol of despotic command, was not, indeed, a sword,
but the ghost of one. The scabbard, artificially stiffened, was empty.

As for the black—whose brain, not body, had schemed and led the revolt,
with the plot—his slight frame, inadequate to that which it held, had
at once yielded to the superior muscular strength of his captor, in the
boat. Seeing all was over, he uttered no sound, and could not be forced
to. His aspect seemed to say, since I cannot do deeds, I will not speak
words. Put in irons in the hold, with the rest, he was carried to Lima.
During the passage, Don Benito did not visit him. Nor then, nor at any
time after, would he look at him. Before the tribunal he refused. When
pressed by the judges he fainted. On the testimony of the sailors alone
rested the legal identity of Babo.

Some months after, dragged to the gibbet at the tail of a mule, the
black met his voiceless end. The body was burned to ashes; but for many
days, the head, that hive of subtlety, fixed on a pole in the Plaza,
met, unabashed, the gaze of the whites; and across the Plaza looked
towards St. Bartholomew’s church, in whose vaults slept then, as now,
the recovered bones of Aranda: and across the Rimac bridge looked
towards the monastery, on Mount Agonia without; where, three months
after being dismissed by the court, Benito Cereno, borne on the bier,
did, indeed, follow his leader.




THE LIGHTNING-ROD MAN.


What grand irregular thunder, thought I, standing on my hearth-stone
among the Acroceraunian hills, as the scattered bolts boomed overhead,
and crashed down among the valleys, every bolt followed by zigzag
irradiations, and swift slants of sharp rain, which audibly rang, like
a charge of spear-points, on my low shingled roof. I suppose, though,
that the mountains hereabouts break and churn up the thunder, so that
it is far more glorious here than on the plain. Hark!—someone at the
door. Who is this that chooses a time of thunder for making calls? And
why don’t he, man-fashion, use the knocker, instead of making that
doleful undertaker’s clatter with his fist against the hollow panel?
But let him in. Ah, here he comes. “Good day, sir:” an entire stranger.
“Pray be seated.” What is that strange-looking walking-stick he
carries: “A fine thunder-storm, sir.”

“Fine?—Awful!”

“You are wet. Stand here on the hearth before the fire.”

“Not for worlds!”

The stranger still stood in the exact middle of the cottage, where he
had first planted himself. His singularity impelled a closer scrutiny.
A lean, gloomy figure. Hair dark and lank, mattedly streaked over his
brow. His sunken pitfalls of eyes were ringed by indigo halos, and
played with an innocuous sort of lightning: the gleam without the bolt.
The whole man was dripping. He stood in a puddle on the bare oak floor:
his strange walking-stick vertically resting at his side.

It was a polished copper rod, four feet long, lengthwise attached to a
neat wooden staff, by insertion into two balls of greenish glass,
ringed with copper bands. The metal rod terminated at the top
tripodwise, in three keen tines, brightly gilt. He held the thing by
the wooden part alone.

“Sir,” said I, bowing politely, “have I the honor of a visit from that
illustrious god, Jupiter Tonans? So stood he in the Greek statue of
old, grasping the lightning-bolt. If you be he, or his viceroy, I have
to thank you for this noble storm you have brewed among our mountains.
Listen: That was a glorious peal. Ah, to a lover of the majestic, it is
a good thing to have the Thunderer himself in one’s cottage. The
thunder grows finer for that. But pray be seated. This old
rush-bottomed arm-chair, I grant, is a poor substitute for your
evergreen throne on Olympus; but, condescend to be seated.”

While I thus pleasantly spoke, the stranger eyed me, half in wonder,
and half in a strange sort of horror; but did not move a foot.

“Do, sir, be seated; you need to be dried ere going forth again.”

I planted the chair invitingly on the broad hearth, where a little fire
had been kindled that afternoon to dissipate the dampness, not the
cold; for it was early in the month of September.

But without heeding my solicitation, and still standing in the middle
of the floor, the stranger gazed at me portentously and spoke.

“Sir,” said he, “excuse me; but instead of my accepting your invitation
to be seated on the hearth there, I solemnly warn _you_, that you had
best accept _mine_, and stand with me in the middle of the room. Good
heavens!” he cried, starting—“there is another of those awful crashes.
I warn you, sir, quit the hearth.”

“Mr. Jupiter Tonans,” said I, quietly rolling my body on the stone, “I
stand very well here.”

“Are you so horridly ignorant, then,” he cried, “as not to know, that
by far the most dangerous part of a house, during such a terrific
tempest as this, is the fire-place?”

“Nay, I did not know that,” involuntarily stepping upon the first board
next to the stone.

The stranger now assumed such an unpleasant air of successful
admonition, that—quite involuntarily again—I stepped back upon the
hearth, and threw myself into the erectest, proudest posture I could
command. But I said nothing.

“For Heaven’s sake,” he cried, with a strange mixture of alarm and
intimidation—“for Heaven’s sake, get off the hearth! Know you not, that
the heated air and soot are conductors;—to say nothing of those immense
iron fire-dogs? Quit the spot—I conjure—I command you.”

“Mr. Jupiter Tonans, I am not accustomed to be commanded in my own
house.”

“Call me not by that pagan name. You are profane in this time of
terror.”

“Sir, will you be so good as to tell me your business? If you seek
shelter from the storm, you are welcome, so long as you be civil; but
if you come on business, open it forthwith. Who are you?”

“I am a dealer in lightning-rods,” said the stranger, softening his
tone; “my special business is—Merciful heaven! what a crash!—Have you
ever been struck—your premises, I mean? No? It’s best to be
provided;”—significantly rattling his metallic staff on the floor;—“by
nature, there are no castles in thunder-storms; yet, say but the word,
and of this cottage I can make a Gibraltar by a few waves of this wand.
Hark, what Himalayas of concussions!”

“You interrupted yourself; your special business you were about to
speak of.”

“My special business is to travel the country for orders for
lightning-rods. This is my specimen-rod;” tapping his staff; “I have
the best of references”—fumbling in his pockets. “In Criggan last
month, I put up three-and-twenty rods on only five buildings.”

“Let me see. Was it not at Criggan last week, about midnight on
Saturday, that the steeple, the big elm, and the assembly-room cupola
were struck? Any of your rods there?”

“Not on the tree and cupola, but the steeple.”

“Of what use is your rod, then?”

“Of life-and-death use. But my workman was heedless. In fitting the rod
at top to the steeple, he allowed a part of the metal to graze the tin
sheeting. Hence the accident. Not my fault, but his. Hark!”

“Never mind. That clap burst quite loud enough to be heard without
finger-pointing. Did you hear of the event at Montreal last year? A
servant girl struck at her bed-side with a rosary in her hand; the
beads being metal. Does your beat extend into the Canadas?”

“No. And I hear that there, iron rods only are in use. They should have
_mine_, which are copper. Iron is easily fused. Then they draw out the
rod so slender, that it has not body enough to conduct the full
electric current. The metal melts; the building is destroyed. My copper
rods never act so. Those Canadians are fools. Some of them knob the rod
at the top, which risks a deadly explosion, instead of imperceptibly
carrying down the current into the earth, as this sort of rod does.
_Mine_ is the only true rod. Look at it. Only one dollar a foot.”

“This abuse of your own calling in another might make one distrustful
with respect to yourself.”

“Hark! The thunder becomes less muttering. It is nearing us, and
nearing the earth, too. Hark! One crammed crash! All the vibrations
made one by nearness. Another flash. Hold!”

“What do you?” I said, seeing him now, instantaneously relinquishing
his staff, lean intently forward towards the window, with his right
fore and middle fingers on his left wrist. But ere the words had well
escaped me, another exclamation escaped him.

“Crash! only three pulses—less than a third of a mile off—yonder,
somewhere in that wood. I passed three stricken oaks there, ripped out
new and glittering. The oak draws lightning more than other timber,
having iron in solution in its sap. Your floor here seems oak.

“Heart-of-oak. From the peculiar time of your call upon me, I suppose
you purposely select stormy weather for your journeys. When the thunder
is roaring, you deem it an hour peculiarly favorable for producing
impressions favorable to your trade.”

“Hark!—Awful!”

“For one who would arm others with fear you seem unbeseemingly timorous
yourself. Common men choose fair weather for their travels: you choose
thunder-storms; and yet—”

“That I travel in thunder-storms, I grant; but not without particular
precautions, such as only a lightning-rod man may know. Hark!
Quick—look at my specimen rod. Only one dollar a foot.”

“A very fine rod, I dare say. But what are these particular precautions
of yours? Yet first let me close yonder shutters; the slanting rain is
beating through the sash. I will bar up.”

“Are you mad? Know you not that yon iron bar is a swift conductor?
Desist.”

“I will simply close the shutters, then, and call my boy to bring me a
wooden bar. Pray, touch the bell-pull there.

“Are you frantic? That bell-wire might blast you. Never touch bell-wire
in a thunder-storm, nor ring a bell of any sort.”

“Nor those in belfries? Pray, will you tell me where and how one may be
safe in a time like this? Is there any part of my house I may touch
with hopes of my life?”

“There is; but not where you now stand. Come away from the wall. The
current will sometimes run down a wall, and—a man being a better
conductor than a wall—it would leave the wall and run into him. Swoop!
_That_ must have fallen very nigh. That must have been globular
lightning.”

“Very probably. Tell me at once, which is, in your opinion, the safest
part of this house?

“This room, and this one spot in it where I stand. Come hither.”

“The reasons first.”

“Hark!—after the flash the gust—the sashes shiver—the house, the
house!—Come hither to me!”

“The reasons, if you please.”

“Come hither to me!”

“Thank you again, I think I will try my old stand—the hearth. And now,
Mr. Lightning-rod-man, in the pauses of the thunder, be so good as to
tell me your reasons for esteeming this one room of the house the
safest, and your own one stand-point there the safest spot in it.”

There was now a little cessation of the storm for a while. The
Lightning-rod man seemed relieved, and replied:—

“Your house is a one-storied house, with an attic and a cellar; this
room is between. Hence its comparative safety. Because lightning
sometimes passes from the clouds to the earth, and sometimes from the
earth to the clouds. Do you comprehend?—and I choose the middle of the
room, because if the lightning should strike the house at all, it would
come down the chimney or walls; so, obviously, the further you are from
them, the better. Come hither to me, now.”

“Presently. Something you just said, instead of alarming me, has
strangely inspired confidence.”

“What have I said?”

“You said that sometimes lightning flashes from the earth to the
clouds.”

“Aye, the returning-stroke, as it is called; when the earth, being
overcharged with the fluid, flashes its surplus upward.”

“The returning-stroke; that is, from earth to sky. Better and better.
But come here on the hearth and dry yourself.”

“I am better here, and better wet.”

“How?”

“It is the safest thing you can do—Hark, again!—to get yourself
thoroughly drenched in a thunder-storm. Wet clothes are better
conductors than the body; and so, if the lightning strike, it might
pass down the wet clothes without touching the body. The storm deepens
again. Have you a rug in the house? Rugs are non-conductors. Get one,
that I may stand on it here, and you, too. The skies blacken—it is dusk
at noon. Hark!—the rug, the rug!”

I gave him one; while the hooded mountains seemed closing and tumbling
into the cottage.

“And now, since our being dumb will not help us,” said I, resuming my
place, “let me hear your precautions in traveling during
thunder-storms.”

“Wait till this one is passed.”

“Nay, proceed with the precautions. You stand in the safest possible
place according to your own account. Go on.”

“Briefly, then. I avoid pine-trees, high houses, lonely barns, upland
pastures, running water, flocks of cattle and sheep, a crowd of men. If
I travel on foot—as to-day—I do not walk fast; if in my buggy, I touch
not its back or sides; if on horseback, I dismount and lead the horse.
But of all things, I avoid tall men.”

“Do I dream? Man avoid man? and in danger-time, too.”

“Tall men in a thunder-storm I avoid. Are you so grossly ignorant as
not to know, that the height of a six-footer is sufficient to discharge
an electric cloud upon him? Are not lonely Kentuckians, ploughing, smit
in the unfinished furrow? Nay, if the six-footer stand by running
water, the cloud will sometimes _select_ him as its conductor to that
running water. Hark! Sure, yon black pinnacle is split. Yes, a man is a
good conductor. The lightning goes through and through a man, but only
peels a tree. But sir, you have kept me so long answering your
questions, that I have not yet come to business. Will you order one of
my rods? Look at this specimen one? See: it is of the best of copper.
Copper’s the best conductor. Your house is low; but being upon the
mountains, that lowness does not one whit depress it. You mountaineers
are most exposed. In mountainous countries the lightning-rod man should
have most business. Look at the specimen, sir. One rod will answer for
a house so small as this. Look over these recommendations. Only one
rod, sir; cost, only twenty dollars. Hark! There go all the granite
Taconics and Hoosics dashed together like pebbles. By the sound, that
must have struck something. An elevation of five feet above the house,
will protect twenty feet radius all about the rod. Only twenty dollars,
sir—a dollar a foot. Hark!—Dreadful!—Will you order? Will you buy?
Shall I put down your name? Think of being a heap of charred offal,
like a haltered horse burnt in his stall; and all in one flash!”

“You pretended envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to and
from Jupiter Tonans,” laughed I; “you mere man who come here to put you
and your pipestem between clay and sky, do you think that because you
can strike a bit of green light from the Leyden jar, that you can
thoroughly avert the supernal bolt? Your rod rusts, or breaks, and
where are you? Who has empowered you, you Tetzel, to peddle round your
indulgences from divine ordinations? The hairs of our heads are
numbered, and the days of our lives. In thunder as in sunshine, I stand
at ease in the hands of my God. False negotiator, away! See, the scroll
of the storm is rolled back; the house is unharmed; and in the blue
heavens I read in the rainbow, that the Deity will not, of purpose,
make war on man’s earth.”

“Impious wretch!” foamed the stranger, blackening in the face as the
rainbow beamed, “I will publish your infidel notions.”

The scowl grew blacker on his face; the indigo-circles enlarged round
his eyes as the storm-rings round the midnight moon. He sprang upon me;
his tri-forked thing at my heart.

I seized it; I snapped it; I dashed it; I trod it; and dragging the
dark lightning-king out of my door, flung his elbowed, copper sceptre
after him.

But spite of my treatment, and spite of my dissuasive talk of him to my
neighbors, the Lightning-rod man still dwells in the land; still
travels in storm-time, and drives a brave trade with the fears of man.




THE ENCANTADAS; OR, ENCHANTED ISLES


SKETCH FIRST.
THE ISLES AT LARGE.

—“That may not be, said then the ferryman,
Least we unweeting hap to be fordonne;
For those same islands seeming now and than,
Are not firme land, nor any certein wonne,
But stragling plots which to and fro do ronne
In the wide waters; therefore are they hight
The Wandering Islands; therefore do them shonne;
For they have oft drawne many a wandring wight
Into most deadly daunger and distressed plight;
For whosoever once hath fastened
His foot thereon may never it secure
But wandreth evermore uncertein and unsure.”


“Darke, dolefull, dreary, like a greedy grave,
That still for carrion carcasses doth crave;
On top whereof ay dwelt the ghastly owl,
Shrieking his balefull note, which ever drave
Far from that haunt all other cheerful fowl,
And all about it wandring ghosts did wayle and howl.”


Take five-and-twenty heaps of cinders dumped here and there in an
outside city lot; imagine some of them magnified into mountains, and
the vacant lot the sea; and you will have a fit idea of the general
aspect of the Encantadas, or Enchanted Isles. A group rather of extinct
volcanoes than of isles; looking much as the world at large might,
after a penal conflagration.

It is to be doubted whether any spot of earth can, in desolateness,
furnish a parallel to this group. Abandoned cemeteries of long ago, old
cities by piecemeal tumbling to their ruin, these are melancholy
enough; but, like all else which has but once been associated with
humanity, they still awaken in us some thoughts of sympathy, however
sad. Hence, even the Dead Sea, along with whatever other emotions it
may at times inspire, does not fail to touch in the pilgrim some of his
less unpleasurable feelings.

And as for solitariness; the great forests of the north, the expanses
of unnavigated waters, the Greenland ice-fields, are the profoundest of
solitudes to a human observer; still the magic of their changeable
tides and seasons mitigates their terror; because, though unvisited by
men, those forests are visited by the May; the remotest seas reflect
familiar stars even as Lake Erie does; and in the clear air of a fine
Polar day, the irradiated, azure ice shows beautifully as malachite.

But the special curse, as one may call it, of the Encantadas, that
which exalts them in desolation above Idumea and the Pole, is, that to
them change never comes; neither the change of seasons nor of sorrows.
Cut by the Equator, they know not autumn, and they know not spring;
while already reduced to the lees of fire, ruin itself can work little
more upon them. The showers refresh the deserts; but in these isles,
rain never falls. Like split Syrian gourds left withering in the sun,
they are cracked by an everlasting drought beneath a torrid sky. “Have
mercy upon me,” the wailing spirit of the Encantadas seems to cry, “and
send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.”

Another feature in these isles is their emphatic uninhabitableness. It
is deemed a fit type of all-forsaken overthrow, that the jackal should
den in the wastes of weedy Babylon; but the Encantadas refuse to harbor
even the outcasts of the beasts. Man and wolf alike disown them. Little
but reptile life is here found: tortoises, lizards, immense spiders,
snakes, and that strangest anomaly of outlandish nature, the _aguano_.
No voice, no low, no howl is heard; the chief sound of life here is a
hiss.

On most of the isles where vegetation is found at all, it is more
ungrateful than the blankness of Aracama. Tangled thickets of wiry
bushes, without fruit and without a name, springing up among deep
fissures of calcined rock, and treacherously masking them; or a parched
growth of distorted cactus trees.

In many places the coast is rock-bound, or, more properly,
clinker-bound; tumbled masses of blackish or greenish stuff like the
dross of an iron-furnace, forming dark clefts and caves here and there,
into which a ceaseless sea pours a fury of foam; overhanging them with
a swirl of gray, haggard mist, amidst which sail screaming flights of
unearthly birds heightening the dismal din. However calm the sea
without, there is no rest for these swells and those rocks; they lash
and are lashed, even when the outer ocean is most at peace with,
itself. On the oppressive, clouded days, such as are peculiar to this
part of the watery Equator, the dark, vitrified masses, many of which
raise themselves among white whirlpools and breakers in detached and
perilous places off the shore, present a most Plutonian sight. In no
world but a fallen one could such lands exist.

Those parts of the strand free from the marks of fire, stretch away in
wide level beaches of multitudinous dead shells, with here and there
decayed bits of sugar-cane, bamboos, and cocoanuts, washed upon this
other and darker world from the charming palm isles to the westward and
southward; all the way from Paradise to Tartarus; while mixed with the
relics of distant beauty you will sometimes see fragments of charred
wood and mouldering ribs of wrecks. Neither will any one be surprised
at meeting these last, after observing the conflicting currents which
eddy throughout nearly all the wide channels of the entire group. The
capriciousness of the tides of air sympathizes with those of the sea.
Nowhere is the wind so light, baffling, and every way unreliable, and
so given to perplexing calms, as at the Encantadas. Nigh a month has
been spent by a ship going from one isle to another, though but ninety
miles between; for owing to the force of the current, the boats
employed to tow barely suffice to keep the craft from sweeping upon the
cliffs, but do nothing towards accelerating her voyage. Sometimes it is
impossible for a vessel from afar to fetch up with the group itself,
unless large allowances for prospective lee-way have been made ere its
coming in sight. And yet, at other times, there is a mysterious
indraft, which irresistibly draws a passing vessel among the isles,
though not bound to them.

True, at one period, as to some extent at the present day, large fleets
of whalemen cruised for spermaceti upon what some seamen call the
Enchanted Ground. But this, as in due place will be described, was off
the great outer isle of Albemarle, away from the intricacies of the
smaller isles, where there is plenty of sea-room; and hence, to that
vicinity, the above remarks do not altogether apply; though even there
the current runs at times with singular force, shifting, too, with as
singular a caprice.

Indeed, there are seasons when currents quite unaccountable prevail for
a great distance round about the total group, and are so strong and
irregular as to change a vessel’s course against the helm, though
sailing at the rate of four or five miles the hour. The difference in
the reckonings of navigators, produced by these causes, along with the
light and variable winds, long nourished a persuasion, that there
existed two distinct clusters of isles in the parallel of the
Encantadas, about a hundred leagues apart. Such was the idea of their
earlier visitors, the Buccaneers; and as late as 1750, the charts of
that part of the Pacific accorded with the strange delusion. And this
apparent fleetingness and unreality of the locality of the isles was
most probably one reason for the Spaniards calling them the Encantada,
or Enchanted Group.

But not uninfluenced by their character, as they now confessedly exist,
the modern voyager will be inclined to fancy that the bestowal of this
name might have in part originated in that air of spell-bound
desertness which so significantly invests the isles. Nothing can better
suggest the aspect of once living things malignly crumbled from
ruddiness into ashes. Apples of Sodom, after touching, seem these
isles.

However wavering their place may seem by reason of the currents, they
themselves, at least to one upon the shore, appear invariably the same:
fixed, cast, glued into the very body of cadaverous death.

Nor would the appellation, enchanted, seem misapplied in still another
sense. For concerning the peculiar reptile inhabitant of these
wilds—whose presence gives the group its second Spanish name,
Gallipagos—concerning the tortoises found here, most mariners have long
cherished a superstition, not more frightful than grotesque. They
earnestly believe that all wicked sea-officers, more especially
commodores and captains, are at death (and, in some cases, before
death) transformed into tortoises; thenceforth dwelling upon these hot
aridities, sole solitary lords of Asphaltum.

Doubtless, so quaintly dolorous a thought was originally inspired by
the woe-begone landscape itself; but more particularly, perhaps, by the
tortoises. For, apart from their strictly physical features, there is
something strangely self-condemned in the appearance of these
creatures. Lasting sorrow and penal hopelessness are in no animal form
so suppliantly expressed as in theirs; while the thought of their
wonderful longevity does not fail to enhance the impression.

Nor even at the risk of meriting the charge of absurdly believing in
enchantments, can I restrain the admission that sometimes, even now,
when leaving the crowded city to wander out July and August among the
Adirondack Mountains, far from the influences of towns and
proportionally nigh to the mysterious ones of nature; when at such
times I sit me down in the mossy head of some deep-wooded gorge,
surrounded by prostrate trunks of blasted pines and recall, as in a
dream, my other and far-distant rovings in the baked heart of the
charmed isles; and remember the sudden glimpses of dusky shells, and
long languid necks protruded from the leafless thickets; and again have
beheld the vitreous inland rocks worn down and grooved into deep ruts
by ages and ages of the slow draggings of tortoises in quest of pools
of scanty water; I can hardly resist the feeling that in my time I have
indeed slept upon evilly enchanted ground.

Nay, such is the vividness of my memory, or the magic of my fancy, that
I know not whether I am not the occasional victim of optical delusion
concerning the Gallipagos. For, often in scenes of social merriment,
and especially at revels held by candle-light in old-fashioned
mansions, so that shadows are thrown into the further recesses of an
angular and spacious room, making them put on a look of haunted
undergrowth of lonely woods, I have drawn the attention of my comrades
by my fixed gaze and sudden change of air, as I have seemed to see,
slowly emerging from those imagined solitudes, and heavily crawling
along the floor, the ghost of a gigantic tortoise, with “Memento * * *
* *” burning in live letters upon his back.


SKETCH SECOND.
TWO SIDES TO A TORTOISE.

“Most ugly shapes and horrible aspects,
Such as Dame Nature selfe mote feare to see,
Or shame, that ever should so fowle defects
From her most cunning hand escaped bee;
All dreadfull pourtraicts of deformitee.
No wonder if these do a man appall;
For all that here at home we dreadfull hold
Be but as bugs to fearen babes withall
Compared to the creatures in these isles’ entrall


“Fear naught, then said the palmer, well avized,
For these same monsters are not there indeed,
But are into these fearful shapes disguized.


“And lifting up his vertuous staffe on high,
Then all that dreadful armie fast gan flye
Into great Zethy’s bosom, where they hidden lye.”


In view of the description given, may one be gay upon the Encantadas?
Yes: that is, find one the gayety, and he will be gay. And, indeed,
sackcloth and ashes as they are, the isles are not perhaps unmitigated
gloom. For while no spectator can deny their claims to a most solemn
and superstitious consideration, no more than my firmest resolutions
can decline to behold the spectre-tortoise when emerging from its
shadowy recess; yet even the tortoise, dark and melancholy as it is
upon the back, still possesses a bright side; its calipee or
breast-plate being sometimes of a faint yellowish or golden tinge.
Moreover, every one knows that tortoises as well as turtle are of such
a make, that if you but put them on their backs you thereby expose
their bright sides without the possibility of their recovering
themselves, and turning into view the other. But after you have done
this, and because you have done this, you should not swear that the
tortoise has no dark side. Enjoy the bright, keep it turned up
perpetually if you can, but be honest, and don’t deny the black.
Neither should he, who cannot turn the tortoise from its natural
position so as to hide the darker and expose his livelier aspect, like
a great October pumpkin in the sun, for that cause declare the creature
to be one total inky blot. The tortoise is both black and bright. But
let us to particulars.

Some months before my first stepping ashore upon the group, my ship was
cruising in its close vicinity. One noon we found ourselves off the
South Head of Albemarle, and not very far from the land. Partly by way
of freak, and partly by way of spying out so strange a country, a
boat’s crew was sent ashore, with orders to see all they could, and
besides, bring back whatever tortoises they could conveniently
transport.

It was after sunset, when the adventurers returned. I looked down over
the ship’s high side as if looking down over the curb of a well, and
dimly saw the damp boat, deep in the sea with some unwonted weight.
Ropes were dropt over, and presently three huge antediluvian-looking
tortoises, after much straining, were landed on deck. They seemed
hardly of the seed of earth. We had been broad upon the waters for five
long months, a period amply sufficient to make all things of the land
wear a fabulous hue to the dreamy mind. Had three Spanish custom-house
officers boarded us then, it is not unlikely that I should have
curiously stared at them, felt of them, and stroked them much as
savages serve civilized guests. But instead of three custom-house
officers, behold these really wondrous tortoises—none of your schoolboy
mud-turtles—but black as widower’s weeds, heavy as chests of plate,
with vast shells medallioned and orbed like shields, and dented and
blistered like shields that have breasted a battle, shaggy, too, here
and there, with dark green moss, and slimy with the spray of the sea.
These mystic creatures, suddenly translated by night from unutterable
solitudes to our peopled deck, affected me in a manner not easy to
unfold. They seemed newly crawled forth from beneath the foundations of
the world. Yea, they seemed the identical tortoises whereon the Hindoo
plants this total sphere. With a lantern I inspected them more closely.
Such worshipful venerableness of aspect! Such furry greenness mantling
the rude peelings and healing the fissures of their shattered shells. I
no more saw three tortoises. They expanded—became transfigured. I
seemed to see three Roman Coliseums in magnificent decay.

Ye oldest inhabitants of this, or any other isle, said I, pray, give me
the freedom of your three-walled towns.

The great feeling inspired by these creatures was that of
age:—dateless, indefinite endurance. And in fact that any other
creature can live and breathe as long as the tortoise of the
Encantadas, I will not readily believe. Not to hint of their known
capacity of sustaining life, while going without food for an entire
year, consider that impregnable armor of their living mail. What other
bodily being possesses such a citadel wherein to resist the assaults of
Time?

As, lantern in hand, I scraped among the moss and beheld the ancient
scars of bruises received in many a sullen fall among the marly
mountains of the isle—scars strangely widened, swollen, half
obliterate, and yet distorted like those sometimes found in the bark of
very hoary trees, I seemed an antiquary of a geologist, studying the
bird-tracks and ciphers upon the exhumed slates trod by incredible
creatures whose very ghosts are now defunct.

As I lay in my hammock that night, overhead I heard the slow weary
draggings of the three ponderous strangers along the encumbered deck.
Their stupidity or their resolution was so great, that they never went
aside for any impediment. One ceased his movements altogether just
before the mid-watch. At sunrise I found him butted like a
battering-ram against the immovable foot of the foremast, and still
striving, tooth and nail, to force the impossible passage. That these
tortoises are the victims of a penal, or malignant, or perhaps a
downright diabolical enchanter, seems in nothing more likely than in
that strange infatuation of hopeless toil which so often possesses
them. I have known them in their journeyings ram themselves heroically
against rocks, and long abide there, nudging, wriggling, wedging, in
order to displace them, and so hold on their inflexible path. Their
crowning curse is their drudging impulse to straightforwardness in a
belittered world.

Meeting with no such hinderance as their companion did, the other
tortoises merely fell foul of small stumbling-blocks—buckets, blocks,
and coils of rigging—and at times in the act of crawling over them
would slip with an astounding rattle to the deck. Listening to these
draggings and concussions, I thought me of the haunt from which they
came; an isle full of metallic ravines and gulches, sunk bottomlessly
into the hearts of splintered mountains, and covered for many miles
with inextricable thickets. I then pictured these three
straight-forward monsters, century after century, writhing through the
shades, grim as blacksmiths; crawling so slowly and ponderously, that
not only did toad-stools and all fungus things grow beneath their feet,
but a sooty moss sprouted upon their backs. With them I lost myself in
volcanic mazes; brushed away endless boughs of rotting thickets; till
finally in a dream I found myself sitting crosslegged upon the
foremost, a Brahmin similarly mounted upon either side, forming a
tripod of foreheads which upheld the universal cope.

Such was the wild nightmare begot by my first impression of the
Encantadas tortoise. But next evening, strange to say, I sat down with
my shipmates, and made a merry repast from tortoise steaks, and
tortoise stews; and supper over, out knife, and helped convert the
three mighty concave shells into three fanciful soup-tureens, and
polished the three flat yellowish calipees into three gorgeous salvers.




SKETCH THIRD.
ROCK RODONDO.

“For they this tight the Rock of vile Reproach,
A dangerous and dreadful place,
To which nor fish nor fowl did once approach,
But yelling meaws with sea-gulls hoars and bace
And cormoyrants with birds of ravenous race,
Which still sit waiting on that dreadful clift.”


“With that the rolling sea resounding soft
In his big base them fitly answered,
And on the Rock, the waves breaking aloft,
A solemn ineane unto them measured.”


“Then he the boteman bad row easily,
And let him heare some part of that rare melody.”


“Suddeinly an innumerable flight
Of harmefull fowles about them fluttering cride,
And with their wicked wings them oft did smight
And sore annoyed, groping in that griesly night.”


“Even all the nation of unfortunate
And fatal birds about them flocked were.”


To go up into a high stone tower is not only a very fine thing in
itself, but the very best mode of gaining a comprehensive view of the
region round about. It is all the better if this tower stand solitary
and alone, like that mysterious Newport one, or else be sole survivor
of some perished castle.

Now, with reference to the Enchanted Isles, we are fortunately supplied
with just such a noble point of observation in a remarkable rock, from
its peculiar figure called of old by the Spaniards, Rock Rodondo, or
Round Rock. Some two hundred and fifty feet high, rising straight from
the sea ten miles from land, with the whole mountainous group to the
south and east. Rock Rodondo occupies, on a large scale, very much the
position which the famous Campanile or detached Bell Tower of St. Mark
does with respect to the tangled group of hoary edifices around it.

Ere ascending, however, to gaze abroad upon the Encantadas, this
sea-tower itself claims attention. It is visible at the distance of
thirty miles; and, fully participating in that enchantment which
pervades the group, when first seen afar invariably is mistaken for a
sail. Four leagues away, of a golden, hazy noon, it seems some Spanish
Admiral’s ship, stacked up with glittering canvas. Sail ho! Sail ho!
Sail ho! from all three masts. But coming nigh, the enchanted frigate
is transformed apace into a craggy keep.

My first visit to the spot was made in the gray of the morning. With a
view of fishing, we had lowered three boats and pulling some two miles
from our vessel, found ourselves just before dawn of day close under
the moon-shadow of Rodondo. Its aspect was heightened, and yet
softened, by the strange double twilight of the hour. The great full
moon burnt in the low west like a half-spent beacon, casting a soft
mellow tinge upon the sea like that cast by a waning fire of embers
upon a midnight hearth; while along the entire east the invisible sun
sent pallid intimations of his coming. The wind was light; the waves
languid; the stars twinkled with a faint effulgence; all nature seemed
supine with the long night watch, and half-suspended in jaded
expectation of the sun. This was the critical hour to catch Rodondo in
his perfect mood. The twilight was just enough to reveal every striking
point, without tearing away the dim investiture of wonder.

From a broken stair-like base, washed, as the steps of a water-palace,
by the waves, the tower rose in entablatures of strata to a shaven
summit. These uniform layers, which compose the mass, form its most
peculiar feature. For at their lines of junction they project flatly
into encircling shelves, from top to bottom, rising one above another
in graduated series. And as the eaves of any old barn or abbey are
alive with swallows, so were all these rocky ledges with unnumbered
sea-fowl. Eaves upon eaves, and nests upon nests. Here and there were
long birdlime streaks of a ghostly white staining the tower from sea to
air, readily accounting for its sail-like look afar. All would have
been bewitchingly quiescent, were it not for the demoniac din created
by the birds. Not only were the eaves rustling with them, but they flew
densely overhead, spreading themselves into a winged and continually
shifting canopy. The tower is the resort of aquatic birds for hundreds
of leagues around. To the north, to the east, to the west, stretches
nothing but eternal ocean; so that the man-of-war hawk coming from the
coasts of North America, Polynesia, or Peru, makes his first land at
Rodondo. And yet though Rodondo be terra-firma, no land-bird ever
lighted on it. Fancy a red-robin or a canary there! What a falling into
the hands of the Philistines, when the poor warbler should be
surrounded by such locust-flights of strong bandit birds, with long
bills cruel as daggers.

I know not where one can better study the Natural History of strange
sea-fowl than at Rodondo. It is the aviary of Ocean. Birds light here
which never touched mast or tree; hermit-birds, which ever fly alone;
cloud-birds, familiar with unpierced zones of air.

Let us first glance low down to the lowermost shelf of all, which is
the widest, too, and but a little space from high-water mark. What
outlandish beings are these? Erect as men, but hardly as symmetrical,
they stand all round the rock like sculptured caryatides, supporting
the next range of eaves above. Their bodies are grotesquely misshapen;
their bills short; their feet seemingly legless; while the members at
their sides are neither fin, wing, nor arm. And truly neither fish,
flesh, nor fowl is the penguin; as an edible, pertaining neither to
Carnival nor Lent; without exception the most ambiguous and least
lovely creature yet discovered by man. Though dabbling in all three
elements, and indeed possessing some rudimental claims to all, the
penguin is at home in none. On land it stumps; afloat it sculls; in the
air it flops. As if ashamed of her failure, Nature keeps this ungainly
child hidden away at the ends of the earth, in the Straits of Magellan,
and on the abased sea-story of Rodondo.

But look, what are yon wobegone regiments drawn up on the next shelf
above? what rank and file of large strange fowl? what sea Friars of
Orders Gray? Pelicans. Their elongated bills, and heavy leathern
pouches suspended thereto, give them the most lugubrious expression. A
pensive race, they stand for hours together without motion. Their dull,
ashy plumage imparts an aspect as if they had been powdered over with
cinders. A penitential bird, indeed, fitly haunting the shores of the
clinkered Encantadas, whereon tormented Job himself might have well sat
down and scraped himself with potsherds.

Higher up now we mark the gony, or gray albatross, anomalously so
called, an unsightly unpoetic bird, unlike its storied kinsman, which
is the snow-white ghost of the haunted Capes of Hope and Horn.

As we still ascend from shelf to shelf, we find the tenants of the
tower serially disposed in order of their magnitude:—gannets, black and
speckled haglets, jays, sea-hens, sperm-whale-birds, gulls of all
varieties:—thrones, princedoms, powers, dominating one above another in
senatorial array; while, sprinkled over all, like an ever-repeated fly
in a great piece of broidery, the stormy petrel or Mother Cary’s
chicken sounds his continual challenge and alarm. That this mysterious
hummingbird of ocean—which, had it but brilliancy of hue, might, from
its evanescent liveliness, be almost called its butterfly, yet whose
chirrup under the stern is ominous to mariners as to the peasant the
death-tick sounding from behind the chimney jamb—should have its
special haunt at the Encantadas, contributes, in the seaman’s mind, not
a little to their dreary spell.

As day advances the dissonant din augments. With ear-splitting cries
the wild birds celebrate their matins. Each moment, flights push from
the tower, and join the aerial choir hovering overhead, while their
places below are supplied by darting myriads. But down through all this
discord of commotion, I hear clear, silver, bugle-like notes unbrokenly
falling, like oblique lines of swift-slanting rain in a cascading
shower. I gaze far up, and behold a snow-white angelic thing, with one
long, lance-like feather thrust out behind. It is the bright,
inspiriting chanticleer of ocean, the beauteous bird, from its
bestirring whistle of musical invocation, fitly styled the “Boatswain’s
Mate.”

The winged, life-clouding Rodondo had its full counterpart in the finny
hosts which peopled the waters at its base. Below the water-line, the
rock seemed one honey-comb of grottoes, affording labyrinthine
lurking-places for swarms of fairy fish. All were strange; many
exceedingly beautiful; and would have well graced the costliest glass
globes in which gold-fish are kept for a show. Nothing was more
striking than the complete novelty of many individuals of this
multitude. Here hues were seen as yet unpainted, and figures which are
unengraved.

To show the multitude, avidity, and nameless fearlessness and tameness
of these fish, let me say, that often, marking through clear spaces of
water—temporarily made so by the concentric dartings of the fish above
the surface—certain larger and less unwary wights, which swam slow and
deep; our anglers would cautiously essay to drop their lines down to
these last. But in vain; there was no passing the uppermost zone. No
sooner did the hook touch the sea, than a hundred infatuates contended
for the honor of capture. Poor fish of Rodondo! in your victimized
confidence, you are of the number of those who inconsiderately trust,
while they do not understand, human nature.

But the dawn is now fairly day. Band after band, the sea-fowl sail away
to forage the deep for their food. The tower is left solitary save the
fish-caves at its base. Its birdlime gleams in the golden rays like the
whitewash of a tall light-house, or the lofty sails of a cruiser. This
moment, doubtless, while we know it to be a dead desert rock other
voyagers are taking oaths it is a glad populous ship.

But ropes now, and let us ascend. Yet soft, this is not so easy.




SKETCH FOURTH.
A PISGAH VIEW FROM THE ROCK.

—“That done, he leads him to the highest mount,
From whence, far off he unto him did show:”—


If you seek to ascend Rock Rodondo, take the following prescription. Go
three voyages round the world as a main-royal-man of the tallest
frigate that floats; then serve a year or two apprenticeship to the
guides who conduct strangers up the Peak of Teneriffe; and as many more
respectively to a rope-dancer, an Indian juggler, and a chamois. This
done, come and be rewarded by the view from our tower. How we get
there, we alone know. If we sought to tell others, what the wiser were
they? Suffice it, that here at the summit you and I stand. Does any
balloonist, does the outlooking man in the moon, take a broader view of
space? Much thus, one fancies, looks the universe from Milton’s
celestial battlements. A boundless watery Kentucky. Here Daniel Boone
would have dwelt content.

Never heed for the present yonder Burnt District of the Enchanted
Isles. Look edgeways, as it were, past them, to the south. You see
nothing; but permit me to point out the direction, if not the place, of
certain interesting objects in the vast sea, which, kissing this
tower’s base, we behold unscrolling itself towards the Antarctic Pole.

We stand now ten miles from the Equator. Yonder, to the East, some six
hundred miles, lies the continent; this Rock being just about on the
parallel of Quito.

Observe another thing here. We are at one of three uninhabited
clusters, which, at pretty nearly uniform distances from the main,
sentinel, at long intervals from each other, the entire coast of South
America. In a peculiar manner, also, they terminate the South American
character of country. Of the unnumbered Polynesian chains to the
westward, not one partakes of the qualities of the Encantadas or
Gallipagos, the isles of St. Felix and St. Ambrose, the isles
Juan-Fernandez and Massafuero. Of the first, it needs not here to
speak. The second lie a little above the Southern Tropic; lofty,
inhospitable, and uninhabitable rocks, one of which, presenting two
round hummocks connected by a low reef, exactly resembles a huge
double-headed shot. The last lie in the latitude of 33°; high, wild and
cloven. Juan Fernandez is sufficiently famous without further
description. Massafuero is a Spanish name, expressive of the fact, that
the isle so called lies _more without_, that is, further off the main
than its neighbor Juan. This isle Massafuero has a very imposing aspect
at a distance of eight or ten miles. Approached in one direction, in
cloudy weather, its great overhanging height and rugged contour, and
more especially a peculiar slope of its broad summits, give it much the
air of a vast iceberg drifting in tremendous poise. Its sides are split
with dark cavernous recesses, as an old cathedral with its gloomy
lateral chapels. Drawing nigh one of these gorges from sea, after a
long voyage, and beholding some tatterdemalion outlaw, staff in hand,
descending its steep rocks toward you, conveys a very queer emotion to
a lover of the picturesque.

On fishing parties from ships, at various times, I have chanced to
visit each of these groups. The impression they give to the stranger
pulling close up in his boat under their grim cliffs is, that surely he
must be their first discoverer, such, for the most part, is the
unimpaired ... silence and solitude. And here, by the way, the mode in
which these isles were really first lighted upon by Europeans is not
unworthy of mention, especially as what is about to be said, likewise
applies to the original discovery of our Encantadas.

Prior to the year 1563, the voyages made by Spanish ships from Peru to
Chili, were full of difficulty. Along this coast, the winds from the
South most generally prevail; and it had been an invariable custom to
keep close in with the land, from a superstitious conceit on the part
of the Spaniards, that were they to lose sight of it, the eternal
trade-wind would waft them into unending waters, from whence would be
no return. Here, involved among tortuous capes and headlands, shoals
and reefs, beating, too, against a continual head wind, often light,
and sometimes for days and weeks sunk into utter calm, the provincial
vessels, in many cases, suffered the extremest hardships, in passages,
which at the present day seem to have been incredibly protracted. There
is on record in some collections of nautical disasters, an account of
one of these ships, which, starting on a voyage whose duration was
estimated at ten days, spent four months at sea, and indeed never again
entered harbor, for in the end she was cast away. Singular to tell,
this craft never encountered a gale, but was the vexed sport of
malicious calms and currents. Thrice, out of provisions, she put back
to an intermediate port, and started afresh, but only yet again to
return. Frequent fogs enveloped her; so that no observation could be
had of her place, and once, when all hands were joyously anticipating
sight of their destination, lo! the vapors lifted and disclosed the
mountains from which they had taken their first departure. In the like
deceptive vapors she at last struck upon a reef, whence ensued a long
series of calamities too sad to detail.

It was the famous pilot, Juan Fernandez, immortalized by the island
named after him, who put an end to these coasting tribulations, by
boldly venturing the experiment—as De Gama did before him with respect
to Europe—of standing broad out from land. Here he found the winds
favorable for getting to the South, and by running westward till beyond
the influences of the trades, he regained the coast without difficulty;
making the passage which, though in a high degree circuitous, proved
far more expeditious than the nominally direct one. Now it was upon
these new tracks, and about the year 1670, or thereabouts, that the
Enchanted Isles, and the rest of the sentinel groups, as they may be
called, were discovered. Though I know of no account as to whether any
of them were found inhabited or no, it may be reasonably concluded that
they have been immemorial solitudes. But let us return to Redondo.

Southwest from our tower lies all Polynesia, hundreds of leagues away;
but straight west, on the precise line of his parallel, no land rises
till your keel is beached upon the Kingsmills, a nice little sail of,
say 5000 miles.

Having thus by such distant references—with Rodondo the only possible
ones—settled our relative place on the sea, let us consider objects not
quite so remote. Behold the grim and charred Enchanted Isles. This
nearest crater-shaped headland is part of Albemarle, the largest of the
group, being some sixty miles or more long, and fifteen broad. Did you
ever lay eye on the real genuine Equator? Have you ever, in the largest
sense, toed the Line? Well, that identical crater-shaped headland
there, all yellow lava, is cut by the Equator exactly as a knife cuts
straight through the centre of a pumpkin pie. If you could only see so
far, just to one side of that same headland, across yon low dikey
ground, you would catch sight of the isle of Narborough, the loftiest
land of the cluster; no soil whatever; one seamed clinker from top to
bottom; abounding in black caves like smithies; its metallic shore
ringing under foot like plates of iron; its central volcanoes standing
grouped like a gigantic chimney-stack.

Narborough and Albemarle are neighbors after a quite curious fashion. A
familiar diagram will illustrate this strange neighborhood:

 [Illustration]

Cut a channel at the above letter joint, and the middle transverse limb
is Narborough, and all the rest is Albemarle. Volcanic Narborough lies
in the black jaws of Albemarle like a wolf’s red tongue in his open
month.

If now you desire the population of Albemarle, I will give you, in
round numbers, the statistics, according to the most reliable estimates
made upon the spot:

Men, 	none. Ant-eaters,	unknown. Man-haters,	unknown.
Lizards,	500,000. Snakes,	500,000. Spiders,	10,000,000.
Salamanders,	unknown. Devils,	do. Making a clean total
of	11,000,000,

exclusive of an incomputable host of fiends, ant-eaters, man-haters,
and salamanders.

Albemarle opens his mouth towards the setting sun. His distended jaws
form a great bay, which Narborough, his tongue, divides into halves,
one whereof is called Weather Bay, the other Lee Bay; while the
volcanic promontories, terminating his coasts, are styled South Head
and North Head. I note this, because these bays are famous in the
annals of the Sperm Whale Fishery. The whales come here at certain
seasons to calve. When ships first cruised hereabouts, I am told, they
used to blockade the entrance of Lee Bay, when their boats going round
by Weather Bay, passed through Narborough channel, and so had the
Leviathans very neatly in a pen.

The day after we took fish at the base of this Round Tower, we had a
fine wind, and shooting round the north headland, suddenly descried a
fleet of full thirty sail, all beating to windward like a squadron in
line. A brave sight as ever man saw. A most harmonious concord of
rushing keels. Their thirty kelsons hummed like thirty harp-strings,
and looked as straight whilst they left their parallel traces on the
sea. But there proved too many hunters for the game. The fleet broke
up, and went their separate ways out of sight, leaving my own ship and
two trim gentlemen of London. These last, finding no luck either,
likewise vanished; and Lee Bay, with all its appurtenances, and without
a rival, devolved to us.

The way of cruising here is this. You keep hovering about the entrance
of the bay, in one beat and out the next. But at times—not always, as
in other parts of the group—a racehorse of a current sweeps right
across its mouth. So, with all sails set, you carefully ply your tacks.
How often, standing at the foremast head at sunrise, with our patient
prow pointed in between these isles, did I gaze upon that land, not of
cakes, but of clinkers, not of streams of sparkling water, but arrested
torrents of tormented lava.

As the ship runs in from the open sea, Narborough presents its side in
one dark craggy mass, soaring up some five or six thousand feet, at
which point it hoods itself in heavy clouds, whose lowest level fold is
as clearly defined against the rocks as the snow-line against the
Andes. There is dire mischief going on in that upper dark. There toil
the demons of fire, who, at intervals, irradiate the nights with a
strange spectral illumination for miles and miles around, but
unaccompanied by any further demonstration; or else, suddenly announce
themselves by terrific concussions, and the full drama of a volcanic
eruption. The blacker that cloud by day, the more may you look for
light by night. Often whalemen have found themselves cruising nigh that
burning mountain when all aglow with a ball-room blaze. Or, rather,
glass-works, you may call this same vitreous isle of Narborough, with
its tall chimney-stacks.

Where we still stand, here on Rodondo, we cannot see all the other
isles, but it is a good place from which to point out where they lie.
Yonder, though, to the E.N.E., I mark a distant dusky ridge. It is
Abington Isle, one of the most northerly of the group; so solitary,
remote, and blank, it looks like No-Man’s Land seen off our northern
shore. I doubt whether two human beings ever touched upon that spot. So
far as yon Abington Isle is concerned, Adam and his billions of
posterity remain uncreated.

Ranging south of Abington, and quite out of sight behind the long spine
of Albemarle, lies James’s Isle, so called by the early Buccaneers
after the luckless Stuart, Duke of York. Observe here, by the way,
that, excepting the isles particularized in comparatively recent times,
and which mostly received the names of famous Admirals, the Encantadas
were first christened by the Spaniards; but these Spanish names were
generally effaced on English charts by the subsequent christenings of
the Buccaneers, who, in the middle of the seventeenth century, called
them after English noblemen and kings. Of these loyal freebooters and
the things which associate their name with the Encantadas, we shall
hear anon. Nay, for one little item, immediately; for between James’s
Isle and Albemarle, lies a fantastic islet, strangely known as
“Cowley’s Enchanted Isle.” But, as all the group is deemed enchanted,
the reason must be given for the spell within a spell involved by this
particular designation. The name was bestowed by that excellent
Buccaneer himself, on his first visit here. Speaking in his published
voyages of this spot, he says—“My fancy led me to call it Cowley’s
Enchanted Isle, for, we having had a sight of it upon several points of
the compass, it appeared always in so many different forms; sometimes
like a ruined fortification; upon another point like a great city,”
etc. No wonder though, that among the Encantadas all sorts of ocular
deceptions and mirages should be met.

That Cowley linked his name with this self-transforming and bemocking
isle, suggests the possibility that it conveyed to him some meditative
image of himself. At least, as is not impossible, if he were any
relative of the mildly-thoughtful and self-upbraiding poet Cowley, who
lived about his time, the conceit might seem unwarranted; for that sort
of thing evinced in the naming of this isle runs in the blood, and may
be seen in pirates as in poets.

Still south of James’s Isle lie Jervis Isle, Duncan Isle, Grossman’s
Isle, Brattle Isle, Wood’s Isle, Chatham Isle, and various lesser
isles, for the most part an archipelago of aridities, without
inhabitant, history, or hope of either in all time to come. But not far
from these are rather notable isles—Barrington, Charles’s, Norfolk, and
Hood’s. Succeeding chapters will reveal some ground for their
notability.




SKETCH FIFTH.
THE FRIGATE, AND SHIP FLYAWAY.

“Looking far forth into the ocean wide,
A goodly ship with banners bravely dight,
And flag in her top-gallant I espide,
Through the main sea making her merry flight.”


Ere quitting Rodondo, it must not be omitted that here, in 1813, the
U.S. frigate Essex, Captain David Porter, came near leaving her bones.
Lying becalmed one morning with a strong current setting her rapidly
towards the rock, a strange sail was descried, which—not out of keeping
with alleged enchantments of the neighborhood—seemed to be staggering
under a violent wind, while the frigate lay lifeless as if spell-bound.
But a light air springing up, all sail was made by the frigate in chase
of the enemy, as supposed—he being deemed an English whale-ship—but the
rapidity of the current was so great, that soon all sight was lost of
him; and, at meridian, the Essex, spite of her drags, was driven so
close under the foam-lashed cliffs of Rodondo that, for a time, all
hands gave her up. A smart breeze, however, at last helped her off,
though the escape was so critical as to seem almost miraculous.

Thus saved from destruction herself, she now made use of that salvation
to destroy the other vessel, if possible. Renewing the chase in the
direction in which the stranger had disappeared, sight was caught of
him the following morning. Upon being descried he hoisted American
colors and stood away from the Essex. A calm ensued; when, still
confident that the stranger was an Englishman, Porter dispatched a
cutter, not to board the enemy, but drive back his boats engaged in
towing him. The cutter succeeded. Cutters were subsequently sent to
capture him; the stranger now showing English colors in place of
American. But, when the frigate’s boats were within a short distance of
their hoped-for prize, another sudden breeze sprang up; the stranger,
under all sail, bore off to the westward, and, ere night, was hull down
ahead of the Essex, which, all this time, lay perfectly becalmed.

This enigmatic craft—American in the morning, and English in the
evening—her sails full of wind in a calm—was never again beheld. An
enchanted ship no doubt. So, at least, the sailors swore.

This cruise of the Essex in the Pacific during the war of 1812, is,
perhaps, the strangest and most stirring to be found in the history of
the American navy. She captured the furthest wandering vessels; visited
the remotest seas and isles; long hovered in the charmed vicinity of
the enchanted group; and, finally, valiantly gave up the ghost fighting
two English frigates in the harbor of Valparaiso. Mention is made of
her here for the same reason that the Buccaneers will likewise receive
record; because, like them, by long cruising among the isles,
tortoise-hunting upon their shores, and generally exploring them; for
these and other reasons, the Essex is peculiarly associated with the
Encantadas.

Here be it said that you have but three, eye-witness authorities worth
mentioning touching the Enchanted Isles:—Cowley, the Buccaneer (1684);
Colnet the whaling-ground explorer (1798); Porter, the post captain
(1813). Other than these you have but barren, bootless allusions from
some few passing voyagers or compilers.




SKETCH SIXTH.
BARRINGTON ISLE AND THE BUCCANEERS.

“Let us all servile base subjection scorn,
And as we be sons of the earth so wide,
Let us our father’s heritage divide,
And challenge to ourselves our portions dew
Of all the patrimony, which a few
hold on hugger-mugger in their hand.”


“Lords of the world, and so will wander free,
Whereso us listeth, uncontroll’d of any.”


“How bravely now we live, how jocund, how near the
first inheritance, without fear, how free from little troubles!”


Near two centuries ago Barrington Isle was the resort of that famous
wing of the West Indian Buccaneers, which, upon their repulse from the
Cuban waters, crossing the Isthmus of Darien, ravaged the Pacific side
of the Spanish colonies, and, with the regularity and timing of a
modern mail, waylaid the royal treasure-ships plying between Manilla
and Acapulco. After the toils of piratic war, here they came to say
their prayers, enjoy their free-and-easies, count their crackers from
the cask, their doubloons from the keg, and measure their silks of Asia
with long Toledos for their yard-sticks.

As a secure retreat, an undiscoverable hiding-place, no spot in those
days could have been better fitted. In the centre of a vast and silent
sea, but very little traversed—surrounded by islands, whose
inhospitable aspect might well drive away the chance navigator—and yet
within a few days’ sail of the opulent countries which they made their
prey—the unmolested Buccaneers found here that tranquillity which they
fiercely denied to every civilized harbor in that part of the world.
Here, after stress of weather, or a temporary drubbing at the hands of
their vindictive foes, or in swift flight with golden booty, those old
marauders came, and lay snugly out of all harm’s reach. But not only
was the place a harbor of safety, and a bower of ease, but for utility
in other things it was most admirable.

Barrington Isle is, in many respects, singularly adapted to careening,
refitting, refreshing, and other seamen’s purposes. Not only has it
good water, and good anchorage, well sheltered from all winds by the
high land of Albemarle, but it is the least unproductive isle of the
group. Tortoises good for food, trees good for fuel, and long grass
good for bedding, abound here, and there are pretty natural walks, and
several landscapes to be seen. Indeed, though in its locality belonging
to the Enchanted group, Barrington Isle is so unlike most of its
neighbors, that it would hardly seem of kin to them.

“I once landed on its western side,” says a sentimental voyager long
ago, “where it faces the black buttress of Albemarle. I walked beneath
groves of trees—not very lofty, and not palm trees, or orange trees, or
peach trees, to be sure—but, for all that, after long sea-faring, very
beautiful to walk under, even though they supplied no fruit. And here,
in calm spaces at the heads of glades, and on the shaded tops of slopes
commanding the most quiet scenery—what do you think I saw? Seats which
might have served Brahmins and presidents of peace societies. Fine old
ruins of what had once been symmetric lounges of stone and turf, they
bore every mark both of artificialness and age, and were, undoubtedly,
made by the Buccaneers. One had been a long sofa, with back and arms,
just such a sofa as the poet Gray might have loved to throw himself
upon, his Crebillon in hand.

“Though they sometimes tarried here for months at a time, and used the
spot for a storing-place for spare spars, sails, and casks; yet it is
highly improbable that the Buccaneers ever erected dwelling-houses upon
the isle. They never were here except their ships remained, and they
would most likely have slept on board. I mention this, because I cannot
avoid the thought, that it is hard to impute the construction of these
romantic seats to any other motive than one of pure peacefulness and
kindly fellowship with nature. That the Buccaneers perpetrated the
greatest outrages is very true—that some of them were mere cutthroats
is not to be denied; but we know that here and there among their host
was a Dampier, a Wafer, and a Cowley, and likewise other men, whose
worst reproach was their desperate fortunes—whom persecution, or
adversity, or secret and unavengeable wrongs, had driven from Christian
society to seek the melancholy solitude or the guilty adventures of the
sea. At any rate, long as those ruins of seats on Barrington remain,
the most singular monuments are furnished to the fact, that all of the
Buccaneers were not unmitigated monsters.

“But during my ramble on the isle I was not long in discovering other
tokens, of things quite in accordance with those wild traits,
popularly, and no doubt truly enough, imputed to the freebooters at
large. Had I picked up old sails and rusty hoops I would only have
thought of the ship’s carpenter and cooper. But I found old cutlasses
and daggers reduced to mere threads of rust, which, doubtless, had
stuck between Spanish ribs ere now. These were signs of the murderer
and robber; the reveler likewise had left his trace. Mixed with shells,
fragments of broken jars were lying here and there, high up upon the
beach. They were precisely like the jars now used upon the Spanish
coast for the wine and Pisco spirits of that country.

“With a rusty dagger-fragment in one hand, and a bit of a wine-jar in
another, I sat me down on the ruinous green sofa I have spoken of, and
bethought me long and deeply of these same Buccaneers. Could it be
possible, that they robbed and murdered one day, reveled the next, and
rested themselves by turning meditative philosophers, rural poets, and
seat-builders on the third? Not very improbable, after all. For
consider the vacillations of a man. Still, strange as it may seem, I
must also abide by the more charitable thought; namely, that among
these adventurers were some gentlemanly, companionable souls, capable
of genuine tranquillity and virtue.”




SKETCH SEVENTH.
CHARLES’S ISLE AND THE DOG-KING.

—So with outragious cry,
A thousand villeins round about him swarmed
Out of the rocks and caves adjoining nye;
Vile caitive wretches, ragged, rude, deformed;
All threatning death, all in straunge manner armed;
Some with unweldy clubs, some with long speares.
Some rusty knives, some staves in fier warmd.


We will not be of any occupation,
Let such vile vassals, born to base vocation,
Drudge in the world, and for their living droyle,
Which have no wit to live withouten toyle.


Southwest of Barrington lies Charles’s Isle. And hereby hangs a history
which I gathered long ago from a shipmate learned in all the lore of
outlandish life.

During the successful revolt of the Spanish provinces from Old Spain,
there fought on behalf of Peru a certain Creole adventurer from Cuba,
who, by his bravery and good fortune, at length advanced himself to
high rank in the patriot army. The war being ended, Peru found itself
like many valorous gentlemen, free and independent enough, but with few
shot in the locker. In other words, Peru had not wherewithal to pay off
its troops. But the Creole—I forget his name—volunteered to take his
pay in lands. So they told him he might have his pick of the Enchanted
Isles, which were then, as they still remain, the nominal appanage of
Peru. The soldier straightway embarks thither, explores the group,
returns to Callao, and says he will take a deed of Charles’s Isle.
Moreover, this deed must stipulate that thenceforth Charles’s Isle is
not only the sole property of the Creole, but is forever free of Peru,
even as Peru of Spain. To be short, this adventurer procures himself to
be made in effect Supreme Lord of the Island, one of the princes of the
powers of the earth.[1]

 [1] The American Spaniards have long been in the habit of making
 presents of islands to deserving individuals. The pilot Juan Fernandez
 procured a deed of the isle named after him, and for some years
 resided there before Selkirk came. It is supposed, however, that he
 eventually contracted the blues upon his princely property, for after
 a time he returned to the main, and as report goes, became a very
 garrulous barber in the city of Lima.


He now sends forth a proclamation inviting subjects to his as yet
unpopulated kingdom. Some eighty souls, men and women, respond; and
being provided by their leader with necessaries, and tools of various
sorts, together with a few cattle and goats, take ship for the promised
land; the last arrival on board, prior to sailing, being the Creole
himself, accompanied, strange to say, by a disciplined cavalry company
of large grim dogs. These, it was observed on the passage, refusing to
consort with the emigrants, remained aristocratically grouped around
their master on the elevated quarter-deck, casting disdainful glances
forward upon the inferior rabble there; much as, from the ramparts, the
soldiers of a garrison, thrown into a conquered town, eye the
inglorious citizen-mob over which they are set to watch.

Now Charles’s Isle not only resembles Barrington Isle in being much
more inhabitable than other parts of the group, but it is double the
size of Barrington, say forty or fifty miles in circuit.

Safely debarked at last, the company, under direction of their lord and
patron, forthwith proceeded to build their capital city. They make
considerable advance in the way of walls of clinkers, and lava floors,
nicely sanded with cinders. On the least barren hills they pasture
their cattle, while the goats, adventurers by nature, explore the far
inland solitudes for a scanty livelihood of lofty herbage. Meantime,
abundance of fish and tortoises supply their other wants.

The disorders incident to settling all primitive regions, in the
present case were heightened by the peculiarly untoward character of
many of the pilgrims. His Majesty was forced at last to proclaim
martial law, and actually hunted and shot with his own hand several of
his rebellious subjects, who, with most questionable intentions, had
clandestinely encamped in the interior, whence they stole by night, to
prowl barefooted on tiptoe round the precincts of the lava-palace. It
is to be remarked, however, that prior to such stern proceedings, the
more reliable men had been judiciously picked out for an infantry
body-guard, subordinate to the cavalry body-guard of dogs. But the
state of politics in this unhappy nation may be somewhat imagined, from
the circumstance that all who were not of the body-guard were downright
plotters and malignant traitors. At length the death penalty was
tacitly abolished, owing to the timely thought, that were strict
sportsman’s justice to be dispensed among such subjects, ere long the
Nimrod King would have little or no remaining game to shoot. The human
part of the life-guard was now disbanded, and set to work cultivating
the soil, and raising potatoes; the regular army now solely consisting
of the dog-regiment. These, as I have heard, were of a singularly
ferocious character, though by severe training rendered docile to their
master. Armed to the teeth, the Creole now goes in state, surrounded by
his canine janizaries, whose terrific bayings prove quite as
serviceable as bayonets in keeping down the surgings of revolt.

But the census of the isle, sadly lessened by the dispensation of
justice, and not materially recruited by matrimony, began to fill his
mind with sad mistrust. Some way the population must be increased. Now,
from its possessing a little water, and its comparative pleasantness of
aspect, Charles’s Isle at this period was occasionally visited by
foreign whalers. These His Majesty had always levied upon for port
charges, thereby contributing to his revenue. But now he had additional
designs. By insidious arts he, from time to time, cajoles certain
sailors to desert their ships, and enlist beneath his banner. Soon as
missed, their captains crave permission to go and hunt them up.
Whereupon His Majesty first hides them very carefully away, and then
freely permits the search. In consequence, the delinquents are never
found, and the ships retire without them.

Thus, by a two-edged policy of this crafty monarch, foreign nations
were crippled in the number of their subjects, and his own were greatly
multiplied. He particularly petted these renegado strangers. But alas
for the deep-laid schemes of ambitious princes, and alas for the vanity
of glory. As the foreign-born Pretorians, unwisely introduced into the
Roman state, and still more unwisely made favorites of the Emperors, at
last insulted and overturned the throne, even so these lawless
mariners, with all the rest of the body-guard and all the populace,
broke out into a terrible mutiny, and defied their master. He marched
against them with all his dogs. A deadly battle ensued upon the beach.
It raged for three hours, the dogs fighting with determined valor, and
the sailors reckless of everything but victory. Three men and thirteen
dogs were left dead upon the field, many on both sides were wounded,
and the king was forced to fly with the remainder of his canine
regiment. The enemy pursued, stoning the dogs with their master into
the wilderness of the interior. Discontinuing the pursuit, the victors
returned to the village on the shore, stove the spirit casks, and
proclaimed a Republic. The dead men were interred with the honors of
war, and the dead dogs ignominiously thrown into the sea. At last,
forced by stress of suffering, the fugitive Creole came down from the
hills and offered to treat for peace. But the rebels refused it on any
other terms than his unconditional banishment. Accordingly, the next
ship that arrived carried away the ex-king to Peru.

The history of the king of Charles’s Island furnishes another
illustration of the difficulty of colonizing barren islands with
unprincipled pilgrims.

Doubtless for a long time the exiled monarch, pensively ruralizing in
Peru, which afforded him a safe asylum in his calamity, watched every
arrival from the Encantadas, to hear news of the failure of the
Republic, the consequent penitence of the rebels, and his own recall to
royalty. Doubtless he deemed the Republic but a miserable experiment
which would soon explode. But no, the insurgents had confederated
themselves into a democracy neither Grecian, Roman, nor American. Nay,
it was no democracy at all, but a permanent _Riotocracy_, which gloried
in having no law but lawlessness. Great inducements being offered to
deserters, their ranks were swelled by accessions of scamps from every
ship which touched their shores. Charles’s Island was proclaimed the
asylum of the oppressed of all navies. Each runaway tar was hailed as a
martyr in the cause of freedom, and became immediately installed a
ragged citizen of this universal nation. In vain the captains of
absconding seamen strove to regain them. Their new compatriots were
ready to give any number of ornamental eyes in their behalf. They had
few cannon, but their fists were not to be trifled with. So at last it
came to pass that no vessels acquainted with the character of that
country durst touch there, however sorely in want of refreshment. It
became Anathema—a sea Alsatia—the unassailed lurking-place of all sorts
of desperadoes, who in the name of liberty did just what they pleased.
They continually fluctuated in their numbers. Sailors, deserting ships
at other islands, or in boats at sea anywhere in that vicinity, steered
for Charles’s Isle, as to their sure home of refuge; while, sated with
the life of the isle, numbers from time to time crossed the water to
the neighboring ones, and there presenting themselves to strange
captains as shipwrecked seamen, often succeeded in getting on board
vessels bound to the Spanish coast, and having a compassionate purse
made up for them on landing there.

One warm night during my first visit to the group, our ship was
floating along in languid stillness, when some one on the forecastle
shouted “Light ho!” We looked and saw a beacon burning on some obscure
land off the beam. Our third mate was not intimate with this part of
the world. Going to the captain he said, “Sir, shall I put off in a
boat? These must be shipwrecked men.”

The captain laughed rather grimly, as, shaking his fist towards the
beacon, he rapped out an oath, and said—“No, no, you precious rascals,
you don’t juggle one of my boats ashore this blessed night. You do
well, you thieves—you do benevolently to hoist a light yonder as on a
dangerous shoal. It tempts no wise man to pull off and see what’s the
matter, but bids him steer small and keep off shore—that is Charles’s
Island; brace up, Mr. Mate, and keep the light astern.”




SKETCH EIGHTH.
NORFOLK ISLE AND THE CHOLA WIDOW.

“At last they in an island did espy
A seemly woman sitting by the shore,
That with great sorrow and sad agony
Seemed some great misfortune to deplore;
And loud to them for succor called evermore.”

“Black his eye as the midnight sky.
White his neck as the driven snow,
Red his cheek as the morning light;—
Cold he lies in the ground below.
My love is dead,
Gone to his death-bed, ys
All under the cactus tree.”

“Each lonely scene shall thee restore,
For thee the tear be duly shed;
Belov’d till life can charm no more,
And mourned till Pity’s self be dead.”


Far to the northeast of Charles’s Isle, sequestered from the rest, lies
Norfolk Isle; and, however insignificant to most voyagers, to me,
through sympathy, that lone island has become a spot made sacred by the
strangest trials of humanity.

It was my first visit to the Encantadas. Two days had been spent ashore
in hunting tortoises. There was not time to capture many; so on the
third afternoon we loosed our sails. We were just in the act of getting
under way, the uprooted anchor yet suspended and invisibly swaying
beneath the wave, as the good ship gradually turned her heel to leave
the isle behind, when the seaman who heaved with me at the windlass
paused suddenly, and directed my attention to something moving on the
land, not along the beach, but somewhat back, fluttering from a height.

In view of the sequel of this little story, be it here narrated how it
came to pass, that an object which partly from its being so small was
quite lost to every other man on board, still caught the eye of my
handspike companion. The rest of the crew, myself included, merely
stood up to our spikes in heaving, whereas, unwontedly exhilarated, at
every turn of the ponderous windlass, my belted comrade leaped atop of
it, with might and main giving a downward, thewey, perpendicular heave,
his raised eye bent in cheery animation upon the slowly receding shore.
Being high lifted above all others was the reason he perceived the
object, otherwise unperceivable; and this elevation of his eye was
owing to the elevation of his spirits; and this again—for truth must
out—to a dram of Peruvian pisco, in guerdon for some kindness done,
secretly administered to him that morning by our mulatto steward. Now,
certainly, pisco does a deal of mischief in the world; yet seeing that,
in the present case, it was the means, though indirect, of rescuing a
human being from the most dreadful fate, must we not also needs admit
that sometimes pisco does a deal of good?

Glancing across the water in the direction pointed out, I saw some
white thing hanging from an inland rock, perhaps half a mile from the
sea.

“It is a bird; a white-winged bird; perhaps a—no; it is—it is a
handkerchief!”

“Ay, a handkerchief!” echoed my comrade, and with a louder shout
apprised the captain.

Quickly now—like the running out and training of a great gun—the long
cabin spy-glass was thrust through the mizzen rigging from the high
platform of the poop; whereupon a human figure was plainly seen upon
the inland rock, eagerly waving towards us what seemed to be the
handkerchief.

Our captain was a prompt, good fellow. Dropping the glass, he lustily
ran forward, ordering the anchor to be dropped again; hands to stand by
a boat, and lower away.

In a half-hour’s time the swift boat returned. It went with six and
came with seven; and the seventh was a woman.

It is not artistic heartlessness, but I wish I could but draw in
crayons; for this woman was a most touching sight; and crayons, tracing
softly melancholy lines, would best depict the mournful image of the
dark-damasked Chola widow.

Her story was soon told, and though given in her own strange language
was as quickly understood; for our captain, from long trading on the
Chilian coast, was well versed in the Spanish. A Cholo, or half-breed
Indian woman of Payta in Peru, three years gone by, with her young
new-wedded husband Felipe, of pure Castilian blood, and her one only
Indian brother, Truxill, Hunilla had taken passage on the main in a
French whaler, commanded by a joyous man; which vessel, bound to the
cruising grounds beyond the Enchanted Isles, proposed passing close by
their vicinity. The object of the little party was to procure tortoise
oil, a fluid which for its great purity and delicacy is held in high
estimation wherever known; and it is well known all along this part of
the Pacific coast. With a chest of clothes, tools, cooking utensils, a
rude apparatus for trying out the oil, some casks of biscuit, and other
things, not omitting two favorite dogs, of which faithful animal all
the Cholos are very fond, Hunilla and her companions were safely landed
at their chosen place; the Frenchman, according to the contract made
ere sailing, engaged to take them off upon returning from a four
months’ cruise in the westward seas; which interval the three
adventurers deemed quite sufficient for their purposes.

On the isle’s lone beach they paid him in silver for their passage out,
the stranger having declined to carry them at all except upon that
condition; though willing to take every means to insure the due
fulfillment of his promise. Felipe had striven hard to have this
payment put off to the period of the ship’s return. But in vain. Still
they thought they had, in another way, ample pledge of the good faith
of the Frenchman. It was arranged that the expenses of the passage home
should not be payable in silver, but in tortoises; one hundred
tortoises ready captured to the returning captain’s hand. These the
Cholos meant to secure after their own work was done, against the
probable time of the Frenchman’s coming back; and no doubt in prospect
already felt, that in those hundred tortoises—now somewhere ranging the
isle’s interior—they possessed one hundred hostages. Enough: the vessel
sailed; the gazing three on shore answered the loud glee of the singing
crew; and ere evening, the French craft was hull down in the distant
sea, its masts three faintest lines which quickly faded from Hunilla’s
eye.

The stranger had given a blithesome promise, and anchored it with
oaths; but oaths and anchors equally will drag; naught else abides on
fickle earth but unkept promises of joy. Contrary winds from out
unstable skies, or contrary moods of his more varying mind, or
shipwreck and sudden death in solitary waves; whatever was the cause,
the blithe stranger never was seen again.

Yet, however dire a calamity was here in store, misgivings of it ere
due time never disturbed the Cholos’ busy mind, now all intent upon the
toilsome matter which had brought them hither. Nay, by swift doom
coming like the thief at night, ere seven weeks went by, two of the
little party were removed from all anxieties of land or sea. No more
they sought to gaze with feverish fear, or still more feverish hope,
beyond the present’s horizon line; but into the furthest future their
own silent spirits sailed. By persevering labor beneath that burning
sun, Felipe and Truxill had brought down to their hut many scores of
tortoises, and tried out the oil, when, elated with their good success,
and to reward themselves for such hard work, they, too hastily, made a
catamaran, or Indian raft, much used on the Spanish main, and merrily
started on a fishing trip, just without a long reef with many jagged
gaps, running parallel with the shore, about half a mile from it. By
some bad tide or hap, or natural negligence of joyfulness (for though
they could not be heard, yet by their gestures they seemed singing at
the time) forced in deep water against that iron bar, the ill-made
catamaran was overset, and came all to pieces; when dashed by
broad-chested swells between their broken logs and the sharp teeth of
the reef, both adventurers perished before Hunilla’s eyes.

Before Hunilla’s eyes they sank. The real woe of this event passed
before her sight as some sham tragedy on the stage. She was seated on a
rude bower among the withered thickets, crowning a lofty cliff, a
little back from the beach. The thickets were so disposed, that in
looking upon the sea at large she peered out from among the branches as
from the lattice of a high balcony. But upon the day we speak of here,
the better to watch the adventure of those two hearts she loved,
Hunilla had withdrawn the branches to one side, and held them so. They
formed an oval frame, through which the bluely boundless sea rolled
like a painted one. And there, the invisible painter painted to her
view the wave-tossed and disjointed raft, its once level logs
slantingly upheaved, as raking masts, and the four struggling arms
indistinguishable among them; and then all subsided into smooth-flowing
creamy waters, slowly drifting the splintered wreck; while first and
last, no sound of any sort was heard. Death in a silent picture; a
dream of the eye; such vanishing shapes as the mirage shows.

So instant was the scene, so trance-like its mild pictorial effect, so
distant from her blasted bower and her common sense of things, that
Hunilla gazed and gazed, nor raised a finger or a wail. But as good to
sit thus dumb, in stupor staring on that dumb show, for all that
otherwise might be done. With half a mile of sea between, how could her
two enchanted arms aid those four fated ones? The distance long, the
time one sand. After the lightning is beheld, what fool shall stay the
thunder-bolt? Felipe’s body was washed ashore, but Truxill’s never
came; only his gay, braided hat of golden straw—that same sunflower
thing he waved to her, pushing from the strand—and now, to the last
gallant, it still saluted her. But Felipe’s body floated to the marge,
with one arm encirclingly outstretched. Lock-jawed in grim death, the
lover-husband softly clasped his bride, true to her even in death’s
dream. Ah, heaven, when man thus keeps his faith, wilt thou be
faithless who created the faithful one? But they cannot break faith who
never plighted it.

It needs not to be said what nameless misery now wrapped the lonely
widow. In telling her own story she passed this almost entirely over,
simply recounting the event. Construe the comment of her features as
you might, from her mere words little would you have weened that
Hunilla was herself the heroine of her tale. But not thus did she
defraud us of our tears. All hearts bled that grief could be so brave.

She but showed us her soul’s lid, and the strange ciphers thereon
engraved; all within, with pride’s timidity, was withheld. Yet was
there one exception. Holding out her small olive hand before her
captain, she said in mild and slowest Spanish, “Señor, I buried him;”
then paused, struggled as against the writhed coilings of a snake, and
cringing suddenly, leaped up, repeating in impassioned pain, “I buried
him, my life, my soul!”

Doubtless, it was by half-unconscious, automatic motions of her hands,
that this heavy-hearted one performed the final office for Felipe, and
planted a rude cross of withered sticks—no green ones might be had—at
the head of that lonely grave, where rested now in lasting un-complaint
and quiet haven he whom untranquil seas had overthrown.

But some dull sense of another body that should be interred, of another
cross that should hallow another grave—unmade as yet—some dull anxiety
and pain touching her undiscovered brother, now haunted the oppressed
Hunilla. Her hands fresh from the burial earth, she slowly went back to
the beach, with unshaped purposes wandering there, her spell-bound eye
bent upon the incessant waves. But they bore nothing to her but a
dirge, which maddened her to think that murderers should mourn. As time
went by, and these things came less dreamingly to her mind, the strong
persuasions of her Romish faith, which sets peculiar store by
consecrated urns, prompted her to resume in waking earnest that pious
search which had but been begun as in somnambulism. Day after day, week
after week, she trod the cindery beach, till at length a double motive
edged every eager glance. With equal longing she now looked for the
living and the dead; the brother and the captain; alike vanished, never
to return. Little accurate note of time had Hunilla taken under such
emotions as were hers, and little, outside herself, served for calendar
or dial. As to poor Crusoe in the self-same sea, no saint’s bell pealed
forth the lapse of week or month; each day went by unchallenged; no
chanticleer announced those sultry dawns, no lowing herds those
poisonous nights. All wonted and steadily recurring sounds, human, or
humanized by sweet fellowship with man, but one stirred that torrid
trance—the cry of dogs; save which naught but the rolling sea invaded
it, an all-pervading monotone; and to the widow that was the least
loved voice she could have heard.

No wonder, that as her thoughts now wandered to the unreturning ship,
and were beaten back again, the hope against hope so struggled in her
soul, that at length she desperately said, “Not yet, not yet; my
foolish heart runs on too fast.” So she forced patience for some
further weeks. But to those whom earth’s sure indraft draws, patience
or impatience is still the same.

Hunilla now sought to settle precisely in her mind, to an hour, how
long it was since the ship had sailed; and then, with the same
precision, how long a space remained to pass. But this proved
impossible. What present day or month it was she could not say. Time
was her labyrinth, in which Hunilla was entirely lost.

And now follows—

Against my own purposes a pause descends upon me here. One knows not
whether nature doth not impose some secrecy upon him who has been privy
to certain things. At least, it is to be doubted whether it be good to
blazon such. If some books are deemed most baneful and their sale
forbid, how, then, with deadlier facts, not dreams of doting men? Those
whom books will hurt will not be proof against events. Events, not
books, should be forbid. But in all things man sows upon the wind,
which bloweth just there whither it listeth; for ill or good, man
cannot know. Often ill comes from the good, as good from ill.

When Hunilla—

Dire sight it is to see some silken beast long dally with a golden
lizard ere she devour. More terrible, to see how feline Fate will
sometimes dally with a human soul, and by a nameless magic make it
repulse a sane despair with a hope which is but mad. Unwittingly I imp
this cat-like thing, sporting with the heart of him who reads; for if
he feel not he reads in vain.

—“The ship sails this day, to-day,” at last said Hunilla to herself;
“this gives me certain time to stand on; without certainty I go mad. In
loose ignorance I have hoped and hoped; now in firm knowledge I will
but wait. Now I live and no longer perish in bewilderings. Holy Virgin,
aid me! Thou wilt waft back the ship. Oh, past length of weary
weeks—all to be dragged over—to buy the certainty of to-day, I freely
give ye, though I tear ye from me!”

As mariners, tost in tempest on some desolate ledge, patch them a boat
out of the remnants of their vessel’s wreck, and launch it in the
self-same waves, see here Hunilla, this lone shipwrecked soul, out of
treachery invoking trust. Humanity, thou strong thing, I worship thee,
not in the laureled victor, but in this vanquished one.

Truly Hunilla leaned upon a reed, a real one; no metaphor; a real
Eastern reed. A piece of hollow cane, drifted from unknown isles, and
found upon the beach, its once jagged ends rubbed smoothly even as by
sand-paper; its golden glazing gone. Long ground between the sea and
land, upper and nether stone, the unvarnished substance was filed bare,
and wore another polish now, one with itself, the polish of its agony.
Circular lines at intervals cut all round this surface, divided it into
six panels of unequal length. In the first were scored the days, each
tenth one marked by a longer and deeper notch; the second was scored
for the number of sea-fowl eggs for sustenance, picked out from the
rocky nests; the third, how many fish had been caught from the shore;
the fourth, how many small tortoises found inland; the fifth, how many
days of sun; the sixth, of clouds; which last, of the two, was the
greater one. Long night of busy numbering, misery’s mathematics, to
weary her too-wakeful soul to sleep; yet sleep for that was none.

The panel of the days was deeply worn—the long tenth notches half
effaced, as alphabets of the blind. Ten thousand times the longing
widow had traced her finger over the bamboo—dull flute, which played,
on, gave no sound—as if counting birds flown by in air would hasten
tortoises creeping through the woods.

After the one hundred and eightieth day no further mark was seen; that
last one was the faintest, as the first the deepest.

“There were more days,” said our Captain; “many, many more; why did you
not go on and notch them, too, Hunilla?”

“Señor, ask me not.”

“And meantime, did no other vessel pass the isle?”

“Nay, Señor;—but—”

“You do not speak; but _what_, Hunilla?”

“Ask me not, Señor.”

“You saw ships pass, far away; you waved to them; they passed on;—was
that it, Hunilla?”

“Señor, be it as you say.”

Braced against her woe, Hunilla would not, durst not trust the weakness
of her tongue. Then when our Captain asked whether any whale-boats had—

But no, I will not file this thing complete for scoffing souls to
quote, and call it firm proof upon their side. The half shall here
remain untold. Those two unnamed events which befell Hunilla on this
isle, let them abide between her and her God. In nature, as in law, it
may be libelous to speak some truths.

Still, how it was that, although our vessel had lain three days
anchored nigh the isle, its one human tenant should not have discovered
us till just upon the point of sailing, never to revisit so lone and
far a spot, this needs explaining ere the sequel come.

The place where the French captain had landed the little party was on
the further and opposite end of the isle. There, too, it was that they
had afterwards built their hut. Nor did the widow in her solitude
desert the spot where her loved ones had dwelt with her, and where the
dearest of the twain now slept his last long sleep, and all her plaints
awaked him not, and he of husbands the most faithful during life.

Now, high, broken land rises between the opposite extremities of the
isle. A ship anchored at one side is invisible from the other. Neither
is the isle so small, but a considerable company might wander for days
through the wilderness of one side, and never be seen, or their halloos
heard, by any stranger holding aloof on the other. Hence Hunilla, who
naturally associated the possible coming of ships with her own part of
the isle, might to the end have remained quite ignorant of the presence
of our vessel, were it not for a mysterious presentiment, borne to her,
so our mariners averred, by this isle’s enchanted air. Nor did the
widow’s answer undo the thought.

“How did you come to cross the isle this morning, then, Hunilla?” said
our Captain.

“Señor, something came flitting by me. It touched my cheek, my heart,
Señor.”

“What do you say, Hunilla?”

“I have said, Señor, something came through the air.”

It was a narrow chance. For when in crossing the isle Hunilla gained
the high land in the centre, she must then for the first have perceived
our masts, and also marked that their sails were being loosed, perhaps
even heard the echoing chorus of the windlass song. The strange ship
was about to sail, and she behind. With all haste she now descends the
height on the hither side, but soon loses sight of the ship among the
sunken jungles at the mountain’s base. She struggles on through the
withered branches, which seek at every step to bar her path, till she
comes to the isolated rock, still some way from the water. This she
climbs, to reassure herself. The ship is still in plainest sight. But
now, worn out with over tension, Hunilla all but faints; she fears to
step down from her giddy perch; she is fain to pause, there where she
is, and as a last resort catches the turban from her head, unfurls and
waves it over the jungles towards us.

During the telling of her story the mariners formed a voiceless circle
round Hunilla and the Captain; and when at length the word was given to
man the fastest boat, and pull round to the isle’s thither side, to
bring away Hunilla’s chest and the tortoise-oil, such alacrity of both
cheery and sad obedience seldom before was seen. Little ado was made.
Already the anchor had been recommitted to the bottom, and the ship
swung calmly to it.

But Hunilla insisted upon accompanying the boat as indispensable pilot
to her hidden hut. So being refreshed with the best the steward could
supply, she started with us. Nor did ever any wife of the most famous
admiral, in her husband’s barge, receive more silent reverence of
respect than poor Hunilla from this boat’s crew.

Rounding many a vitreous cape and bluff, in two hours’ time we shot
inside the fatal reef; wound into a secret cove, looked up along a
green many-gabled lava wall, and saw the island’s solitary dwelling.

It hung upon an impending cliff, sheltered on two sides by tangled
thickets, and half-screened from view in front by juttings of the rude
stairway, which climbed the precipice from the sea. Built of canes, it
was thatched with long, mildewed grass. It seemed an abandoned
hay-rick, whose haymakers were now no more. The roof inclined but one
way; the eaves coming to within two feet of the ground. And here was a
simple apparatus to collect the dews, or rather doubly-distilled and
finest winnowed rains, which, in mercy or in mockery, the night-skies
sometimes drop upon these blighted Encantadas. All along beneath the
eaves, a spotted sheet, quite weather-stained, was spread, pinned to
short, upright stakes, set in the shallow sand. A small clinker, thrown
into the cloth, weighed its middle down, thereby straining all moisture
into a calabash placed below. This vessel supplied each drop of water
ever drunk upon the isle by the Cholos. Hunilla told us the calabash,
would sometimes, but not often, be half filled overnight. It held six
quarts, perhaps. “But,” said she, “we were used to thirst. At sandy
Payta, where I live, no shower from heaven ever fell; all the water
there is brought on mules from the inland vales.”

Tied among the thickets were some twenty moaning tortoises, supplying
Hunilla’s lonely larder; while hundreds of vast tableted black
bucklers, like displaced, shattered tomb-stones of dark slate, were
also scattered round. These were the skeleton backs of those great
tortoises from which Felipe and Truxill had made their precious oil.
Several large calabashes and two goodly kegs were filled with it. In a
pot near by were the caked crusts of a quantity which had been
permitted to evaporate. “They meant to have strained it off next day,”
said Hunilla, as she turned aside.

I forgot to mention the most singular sight of all, though the first
that greeted us after landing.

Some ten small, soft-haired, ringleted dogs, of a beautiful breed,
peculiar to Peru, set up a concert of glad welcomings when we gained
the beach, which was responded to by Hunilla. Some of these dogs had,
since her widowhood, been born upon the isle, the progeny of the two
brought from Payta. Owing to the jagged steeps and pitfalls, tortuous
thickets, sunken clefts and perilous intricacies of all sorts in the
interior, Hunilla, admonished by the loss of one favorite among them,
never allowed these delicate creatures to follow her in her occasional
birds’-nests climbs and other wanderings; so that, through long
habituation, they offered not to follow, when that morning she crossed
the land, and her own soul was then too full of other things to heed
their lingering behind. Yet, all along she had so clung to them, that,
besides what moisture they lapped up at early daybreak from the small
scoop-holes among the adjacent rocks, she had shared the dew of her
calabash among them; never laying by any considerable store against
those prolonged and utter droughts which, in some disastrous seasons,
warp these isles.

Having pointed out, at our desire, what few things she would like
transported to the ship—her chest, the oil, not omitting the live
tortoises which she intended for a grateful present to our Captain—we
immediately set to work, carrying them to the boat down the long,
sloping stair of deeply-shadowed rock. While my comrades were thus
employed, I looked and Hunilla had disappeared.

It was not curiosity alone, but, it seems to me, something different
mingled with it, which prompted me to drop my tortoise, and once more
gaze slowly around. I remembered the husband buried by Hunilla’s hands.
A narrow pathway led into a dense part of the thickets. Following it
through many mazes, I came out upon a small, round, open space, deeply
chambered there.

The mound rose in the middle; a bare heap of finest sand, like that
unverdured heap found at the bottom of an hour-glass run out. At its
head stood the cross of withered sticks; the dry, peeled bark still
fraying from it; its transverse limb tied up with rope, and forlornly
adroop in the silent air.

Hunilla was partly prostrate upon the grave; her dark head bowed, and
lost in her long, loosened Indian hair; her hands extended to the
cross-foot, with a little brass crucifix clasped between; a crucifix
worn featureless, like an ancient graven knocker long plied in vain.
She did not see me, and I made no noise, but slid aside, and left the
spot.

A few moments ere all was ready for our going, she reappeared among us.
I looked into her eyes, but saw no tear. There was something which
seemed strangely haughty in her air, and yet it was the air of woe. A
Spanish and an Indian grief, which would not visibly lament. Pride’s
height in vain abased to proneness on the rack; nature’s pride subduing
nature’s torture.

Like pages the small and silken dogs surrounded her, as she slowly
descended towards the beach. She caught the two most eager creatures in
her arms:—“Mia Teeta! Mia Tomoteeta!” and fondling them, inquired how
many could we take on board.

The mate commanded the boat’s crew; not a hard-hearted man, but his way
of life had been such that in most things, even in the smallest, simple
utility was his leading motive.

“We cannot take them all, Hunilla; our supplies are short; the winds
are unreliable; we may be a good many days going to Tombez. So take
those you have, Hunilla; but no more.”

She was in the boat; the oarsmen, too, were seated; all save one, who
stood ready to push off and then spring himself. With the sagacity of
their race, the dogs now seemed aware that they were in the very
instant of being deserted upon a barren strand. The gunwales of the
boat were high; its prow—presented inland—was lifted; so owing to the
water, which they seemed instinctively to shun, the dogs could not well
leap into the little craft. But their busy paws hard scraped the prow,
as it had been some farmer’s door shutting them out from shelter in a
winter storm. A clamorous agony of alarm. They did not howl, or whine;
they all but spoke.

“Push off! Give way!” cried the mate. The boat gave one heavy drag and
lurch, and next moment shot swiftly from the beach, turned on her heel,
and sped. The dogs ran howling along the water’s marge; now pausing to
gaze at the flying boat, then motioning as if to leap in chase, but
mysteriously withheld themselves; and again ran howling along the
beach. Had they been human beings, hardly would they have more vividly
inspired the sense of desolation. The oars were plied as confederate
feathers of two wings. No one spoke. I looked back upon the beach, and
then upon Hunilla, but her face was set in a stern dusky calm. The dogs
crouching in her lap vainly licked her rigid hands. She never looked
behind her: but sat motionless, till we turned a promontory of the
coast and lost all sights and sounds astern. She seemed as one who,
having experienced the sharpest of mortal pangs, was henceforth content
to have all lesser heartstrings riven, one by one. To Hunilla, pain
seemed so necessary, that pain in other beings, though by love and
sympathy made her own, was unrepiningly to be borne. A heart of
yearning in a frame of steel. A heart of earthly yearning, frozen by
the frost which falleth from the sky.

The sequel is soon told. After a long passage, vexed by calms and
baffling winds, we made the little port of Tombez in Peru, there to
recruit the ship. Payta was not very distant. Our captain sold the
tortoise oil to a Tombez merchant; and adding to the silver a
contribution from all hands, gave it to our silent passenger, who knew
not what the mariners had done.

The last seen of lone Hunilla she was passing into Payta town, riding
upon a small gray ass; and before her on the ass’s shoulders, she eyed
the jointed workings of the beast’s armorial cross.




SKETCH NINTH.
HOOD’S ISLE AND THE HERMIT OBERLUS.

“That darkesome glen they enter, where they find
That cursed man low sitting on the ground,
Musing full sadly in his sullein mind;
His griesly lockes long gronen and unbound,
Disordered hong about his shoulders round,
And hid his face, through which his hollow eyne
Lookt deadly dull, and stared as astound;
His raw-bone cheekes, through penurie and pine,
Were shronke into the jawes, as he did never dine.
His garments nought but many ragged clouts,
With thornes together pind and patched reads,
The which his naked sides he wrapt abouts.”


Southeast of Crossman’s Isle lies Hood’s Isle, or McCain’s Beclouded
Isle; and upon its south side is a vitreous cove with a wide strand of
dark pounded black lava, called Black Beach, or Oberlus’s Landing. It
might fitly have been styled Charon’s.

It received its name from a wild white creature who spent many years
here; in the person of a European bringing into this savage region
qualities more diabolical than are to be found among any of the
surrounding cannibals.

About half a century ago, Oberlus deserted at the above-named island,
then, as now, a solitude. He built himself a den of lava and clinkers,
about a mile from the Landing, subsequently called after him, in a
vale, or expanded gulch, containing here and there among the rocks
about two acres of soil capable of rude cultivation; the only place on
the isle not too blasted for that purpose. Here he succeeded in raising
a sort of degenerate potatoes and pumpkins, which from time to time he
exchanged with needy whalemen passing, for spirits or dollars.

His appearance, from all accounts, was that of the victim of some
malignant sorceress; he seemed to have drunk of Circe’s cup;
beast-like; rags insufficient to hide his nakedness; his befreckled
skin blistered by continual exposure to the sun; nose flat; countenance
contorted, heavy, earthy; hair and beard unshorn, profuse, and of fiery
red. He struck strangers much as if he were a volcanic creature thrown
up by the same convulsion which exploded into sight the isle. All
bepatched and coiled asleep in his lonely lava den among the mountains,
he looked, they say, as a heaped drift of withered leaves, torn from
autumn trees, and so left in some hidden nook by the whirling halt for
an instant of a fierce night-wind, which then ruthlessly sweeps on,
somewhere else to repeat the capricious act. It is also reported to
have been the strangest sight, this same Oberlus, of a sultry, cloudy
morning, hidden under his shocking old black tarpaulin hat, hoeing
potatoes among the lava. So warped and crooked was his strange nature,
that the very handle of his hoe seemed gradually to have shrunk and
twisted in his grasp, being a wretched bent stick, elbowed more like a
savage’s war-sickle than a civilized hoe-handle. It was his mysterious
custom upon a first encounter with a stranger ever to present his back;
possibly, because that was his better side, since it revealed the
least. If the encounter chanced in his garden, as it sometimes did—the
new-landed strangers going from the sea-side straight through the
gorge, to hunt up the queer green-grocer reported doing business
here—Oberlus for a time hoed on, unmindful of all greeting, jovial or
bland; as the curious stranger would turn to face him, the recluse, hoe
in hand, as diligently would avert himself; bowed over, and sullenly
revolving round his murphy hill. Thus far for hoeing. When planting,
his whole aspect and all his gestures were so malevolently and
uselessly sinister and secret, that he seemed rather in act of dropping
poison into wells than potatoes into soil. But among his lesser and
more harmless marvels was an idea he ever had, that his visitors came
equally as well led by longings to behold the mighty hermit Oberlus in
his royal state of solitude, as simply, to obtain potatoes, or find
whatever company might be upon a barren isle. It seems incredible that
such a being should possess such vanity; a misanthrope be conceited;
but he really had his notion; and upon the strength of it, often gave
himself amusing airs to captains. But after all, this is somewhat of a
piece with the well-known eccentricity of some convicts, proud of that
very hatefulness which makes them notorious. At other times, another
unaccountable whim would seize him, and he would long dodge advancing
strangers round the clinkered corners of his hut; sometimes like a
stealthy bear, he would slink through the withered thickets up the
mountains, and refuse to see the human face.

Except his occasional visitors from the sea, for a long period, the
only companions of Oberlus were the crawling tortoises; and he seemed
more than degraded to their level, having no desires for a time beyond
theirs, unless it were for the stupor brought on by drunkenness. But
sufficiently debased as he appeared, there yet lurked in him, only
awaiting occasion for discovery, a still further proneness. Indeed, the
sole superiority of Oberlus over the tortoises was his possession of a
larger capacity of degradation; and along with that, something like an
intelligent will to it. Moreover, what is about to be revealed, perhaps
will show, that selfish ambition, or the love of rule for its own sake,
far from being the peculiar infirmity of noble minds, is shared by
beings which have no mind at all. No creatures are so selfishly
tyrannical as some brutes; as any one who has observed the tenants of
the pasture must occasionally have observed.

“This island’s mine by Sycorax my mother,” said Oberlus to himself,
glaring round upon his haggard solitude. By some means, barter or
theft—for in those days ships at intervals still kept touching at his
Landing—he obtained an old musket, with a few charges of powder and
ball. Possessed of arms, he was stimulated to enterprise, as a tiger
that first feels the coming of its claws. The long habit of sole
dominion over every object round him, his almost unbroken solitude, his
never encountering humanity except on terms of misanthropic
independence, or mercantile craftiness, and even such encounters being
comparatively but rare; all this must have gradually nourished in him a
vast idea of his own importance, together with a pure animal sort of
scorn for all the rest of the universe.

The unfortunate Creole, who enjoyed his brief term of royalty at
Charles’s Isle was perhaps in some degree influenced by not unworthy
motives; such as prompt other adventurous spirits to lead colonists
into distant regions and assume political preeminence over them. His
summary execution of many of his Peruvians is quite pardonable,
considering the desperate characters he had to deal with; while his
offering canine battle to the banded rebels seems under the
circumstances altogether just. But for this King Oberlus and what
shortly follows, no shade of palliation can be given. He acted out of
mere delight in tyranny and cruelty, by virtue of a quality in him
inherited from Sycorax his mother. Armed now with that shocking
blunderbuss, strong in the thought of being master of that horrid isle,
he panted for a chance to prove his potency upon the first specimen of
humanity which should fall unbefriended into his hands.

Nor was he long without it. One day he spied a boat upon the beach,
with one man, a negro, standing by it. Some distance off was a ship,
and Oberlus immediately knew how matters stood. The vessel had put in
for wood, and the boat’s crew had gone into the thickets for it. From a
convenient spot he kept watch of the boat, till presently a straggling
company appeared loaded with billets. Throwing these on the beach, they
again went into the thickets, while the negro proceeded to load the
boat.

Oberlus now makes all haste and accosts the negro, who, aghast at
seeing any living being inhabiting such a solitude, and especially so
horrific a one, immediately falls into a panic, not at all lessened by
the ursine suavity of Oberlus, who begs the favor of assisting him in
his labors. The negro stands with several billets on his shoulder, in
act of shouldering others; and Oberlus, with a short cord concealed in
his bosom, kindly proceeds to lift those other billets to their place.
In so doing, he persists in keeping behind the negro, who, rightly
suspicious of this, in vain dodges about to gain the front of Oberlus;
but Oberlus dodges also; till at last, weary of this bootless attempt
at treachery, or fearful of being surprised by the remainder of the
party, Oberlus runs off a little space to a bush, and fetching his
blunderbuss, savagely commands the negro to desist work and follow him.
He refuses. Whereupon, presenting his piece, Oberlus snaps at him.
Luckily the blunderbuss misses fire; but by this time, frightened out
of his wits, the negro, upon a second intrepid summons, drops his
billets, surrenders at discretion, and follows on. By a narrow defile
familiar to him, Oberlus speedily removes out of sight of the water.

On their way up the mountains, he exultingly informs the negro, that
henceforth he is to work for him, and be his slave, and that his
treatment would entirely depend on his future conduct. But Oberlus,
deceived by the first impulsive cowardice of the black, in an evil
moment slackens his vigilance. Passing through a narrow way, and
perceiving his leader quite off his guard, the negro, a powerful
fellow, suddenly grasps him in his arms, throws him down, wrests his
musketoon from him, ties his hands with the monster’s own cord,
shoulders him, and returns with him down to the boat. When the rest of
the party arrive, Oberlus is carried on board the ship. This proved an
Englishman, and a smuggler; a sort of craft not apt to be
over-charitable. Oberlus is severely whipped, then handcuffed, taken
ashore, and compelled to make known his habitation and produce his
property. His potatoes, pumpkins, and tortoises, with a pile of dollars
he had hoarded from his mercantile operations were secured on the spot.
But while the too vindictive smugglers were busy destroying his hut and
garden, Oberlus makes his escape into the mountains, and conceals
himself there in impenetrable recesses, only known to himself, till the
ship sails, when he ventures back, and by means of an old file which he
sticks into a tree, contrives to free himself from his handcuffs.

Brooding among the ruins of his hut, and the desolate clinkers and
extinct volcanoes of this outcast isle, the insulted misanthrope now
meditates a signal revenge upon humanity, but conceals his purposes.
Vessels still touch the Landing at times; and by-and-by Oberlus is
enabled to supply them with some vegetables.

Warned by his former failure in kidnapping strangers, he now pursues a
quite different plan. When seamen come ashore, he makes up to them like
a free-and-easy comrade, invites them to his hut, and with whatever
affability his red-haired grimness may assume, entreats them to drink
his liquor and be merry. But his guests need little pressing; and so,
soon as rendered insensible, are tied hand and foot, and pitched among
the clinkers, are there concealed till the ship departs, when, finding
themselves entirely dependent upon Oberlus, alarmed at his changed
demeanor, his savage threats, and above all, that shocking blunderbuss,
they willingly enlist under him, becoming his humble slaves, and
Oberlus the most incredible of tyrants. So much so, that two or three
perish beneath his initiating process. He sets the remainder—four of
them—to breaking the caked soil; transporting upon their backs loads of
loamy earth, scooped up in moist clefts among the mountains; keeps them
on the roughest fare; presents his piece at the slightest hint of
insurrection; and in all respects converts them into reptiles at his
feet—plebeian garter-snakes to this Lord Anaconda.

At last, Oberlus contrives to stock his arsenal with four rusty
cutlasses, and an added supply of powder and ball intended for his
blunderbuss. Remitting in good part the labor of his slaves, he now
approves himself a man, or rather devil, of great abilities in the way
of cajoling or coercing others into acquiescence with his own ulterior
designs, however at first abhorrent to them. But indeed, prepared for
almost any eventual evil by their previous lawless life, as a sort of
ranging Cow-Boys of the sea, which had dissolved within them the whole
moral man, so that they were ready to concrete in the first offered
mould of baseness now; rotted down from manhood by their hopeless
misery on the isle; wonted to cringe in all things to their lord,
himself the worst of slaves; these wretches were now become wholly
corrupted to his hands. He used them as creatures of an inferior race;
in short, he gaffles his four animals, and makes murderers of them; out
of cowards fitly manufacturing bravos.

Now, sword or dagger, human arms are but artificial claws and fangs,
tied on like false spurs to the fighting cock. So, we repeat, Oberlus,
czar of the isle, gaffles his four subjects; that is, with intent of
glory, puts four rusty cutlasses into their hands. Like any other
autocrat, he had a noble army now.

It might be thought a servile war would hereupon ensue. Arms in the
hands of trodden slaves? how indiscreet of Emperor Oberlus! Nay, they
had but cutlasses—sad old scythes enough—he a blunderbuss, which by its
blind scatterings of all sorts of boulders, clinkers, and other scoria
would annihilate all four mutineers, like four pigeons at one shot.
Besides, at first he did not sleep in his accustomed hut; every lurid
sunset, for a time, he might have been seen wending his way among the
riven mountains, there to secrete himself till dawn in some sulphurous
pitfall, undiscoverable to his gang; but finding this at last too
troublesome, he now each evening tied his slaves hand and foot, hid the
cutlasses, and thrusting them into his barracks, shut to the door, and
lying down before it, beneath a rude shed lately added, slept out the
night, blunderbuss in hand.

It is supposed that not content with daily parading over a cindery
solitude at the head of his fine army, Oberlus now meditated the most
active mischief; his probable object being to surprise some passing
ship touching at his dominions, massacre the crew, and run away with
her to parts unknown. While these plans were simmering in his head, two
ships touch in company at the isle, on the opposite side to his; when
his designs undergo a sudden change.

The ships are in want of vegetables, which Oberlus promises in great
abundance, provided they send their boats round to his landing, so that
the crews may bring the vegetables from his garden; informing the two
captains, at the same time, that his rascals—slaves and soldiers—had
become so abominably lazy and good-for-nothing of late, that he could
not make them work by ordinary inducements, and did not have the heart
to be severe with them.

The arrangement was agreed to, and the boats were sent and hauled upon
the beach. The crews went to the lava hut; but to their surprise nobody
was there. After waiting till their patience was exhausted, they
returned to the shore, when lo, some stranger—not the Good Samaritan
either—seems to have very recently passed that way. Three of the boats
were broken in a thousand pieces, and the fourth was missing. By hard
toil over the mountains and through the clinkers, some of the strangers
succeeded in returning to that side of the isle where the ships lay,
when fresh boats are sent to the relief of the rest of the hapless
party.

However amazed at the treachery of Oberlus, the two captains, afraid of
new and still more mysterious atrocities—and indeed, half imputing such
strange events to the enchantments associated with these isles—perceive
no security but in instant flight; leaving Oberlus and his army in
quiet possession of the stolen boat.

On the eve of sailing they put a letter in a keg, giving the Pacific
Ocean intelligence of the affair, and moored the keg in the bay. Some
time subsequent, the keg was opened by another captain chancing to
anchor there, but not until after he had dispatched a boat round to
Oberlus’s Landing. As may be readily surmised, he felt no little
inquietude till the boat’s return: when another letter was handed him,
giving Oberlus’s version of the affair. This precious document had been
found pinned half-mildewed to the clinker wall of the sulphurous and
deserted hut. It ran as follows: showing that Oberlus was at least an
accomplished writer, and no mere boor; and what is more, was capable of
the most tristful eloquence.

“Sir: I am the most unfortunate ill-treated gentleman that lives. I am
a patriot, exiled from my country by the cruel hand of tyranny.

“Banished to these Enchanted Isles, I have again and again besought
captains of ships to sell me a boat, but always have been refused,
though I offered the handsomest prices in Mexican dollars. At length an
opportunity presented of possessing myself of one, and I did not let it
slip.

“I have been long endeavoring, by hard labor and much solitary
suffering, to accumulate something to make myself comfortable in a
virtuous though unhappy old age; but at various times have been robbed
and beaten by men professing to be Christians.

“To-day I sail from the Enchanted group in the good boat Charity bound
to the Feejee Isles.

“FATHERLESS OBERLUS.


“_P.S._—Behind the clinkers, nigh the oven, you will find the old fowl.
Do not kill it; be patient; I leave it setting; if it shall have any
chicks, I hereby bequeath them to you, whoever you may be. But don’t
count your chicks before they are hatched.”

The fowl proved a starveling rooster, reduced to a sitting posture by
sheer debility.

Oberlus declares that he was bound to the Feejee Isles; but this was
only to throw pursuers on a false scent. For, after a long time, he
arrived, alone in his open boat, at Guayaquil. As his miscreants were
never again beheld on Hood’s Isle, it is supposed, either that they
perished for want of water on the passage to Guayaquil, or, what is
quite as probable, were thrown overboard by Oberlus, when he found the
water growing scarce.

From Guayaquil Oberlus proceeded to Payta; and there, with that
nameless witchery peculiar to some of the ugliest animals, wound
himself into the affections of a tawny damsel; prevailing upon her to
accompany him back to his Enchanted Isle; which doubtless he painted as
a Paradise of flowers, not a Tartarus of clinkers.

But unfortunately for the colonization of Hood’s Isle with a choice
variety of animated nature, the extraordinary and devilish aspect of
Oberlus made him to be regarded in Payta as a highly suspicious
character. So that being found concealed one night, with matches in his
pocket, under the hull of a small vessel just ready to be launched, he
was seized and thrown into jail.

The jails in most South American towns are generally of the least
wholesome sort. Built of huge cakes of sun-burnt brick, and containing
but one room, without windows or yard, and but one door heavily grated
with wooden bars, they present both within and without the grimmest
aspect. As public edifices they conspicuously stand upon the hot and
dusty Plaza, offering to view, through the gratings, their villainous
and hopeless inmates, burrowing in all sorts of tragic squalor. And
here, for a long time, Oberlus was seen; the central figure of a
mongrel and assassin band; a creature whom it is religion to detest,
since it is philanthropy to hate a misanthrope.

_Note_.—They who may be disposed to question the possibility of the
character above depicted, are referred to the 2d vol. of Porter’s
Voyage into the Pacific, where they will recognize many sentences, for
expedition’s sake derived verbatim from thence, and incorporated here;
the main difference—save a few passing reflections—between the two
accounts being, that the present writer has added to Porter’s facts
accessory ones picked up in the Pacific from reliable sources; and
where facts conflict, has naturally preferred his own authorities to
Porter’s. As, for instance, _his_ authorities place Oberlus on Hood’s
Isle: Porter’s, on Charles’s Isle. The letter found in the hut is also
somewhat different; for while at the Encantadas he was informed that,
not only did it evince a certain clerkliness, but was full of the
strangest satiric effrontery which does not adequately appear in
Porter’s version. I accordingly altered it to suit the general
character of its author.




SKETCH TENTH.
RUNAWAYS, CASTAWAYS, SOLITARIES, GRAVE-STONES, ETC.

“And all about old stocks and stubs of trees,
    Whereon nor fruit nor leaf was ever seen,
Did hang upon ragged knotty knees,
    On which had many wretches hanged been.”


Some relics of the hut of Oberlus partially remain to this day at the
head of the clinkered valley. Nor does the stranger, wandering among
other of the Enchanted Isles, fail to stumble upon still other solitary
abodes, long abandoned to the tortoise and the lizard. Probably few
parts of earth have, in modern times, sheltered so many solitaries. The
reason is, that these isles are situated in a distant sea, and the
vessels which occasionally visit them are mostly all whalers, or ships
bound on dreary and protracted voyages, exempting them in a good degree
from both the oversight and the memory of human law. Such is the
character of some commanders and some seamen, that under these untoward
circumstances, it is quite impossible but that scenes of unpleasantness
and discord should occur between them. A sullen hatred of the tyrannic
ship will seize the sailor, and he gladly exchanges it for isles,
which, though blighted as by a continual sirocco and burning breeze,
still offer him, in their labyrinthine interior, a retreat beyond the
possibility of capture. To flee the ship in any Peruvian or Chilian
port, even the smallest and most rustical, is not unattended with great
risk of apprehension, not to speak of jaguars. A reward of five pesos
sends fifty dastardly Spaniards into the wood, who, with long knives,
scour them day and night in eager hopes of securing their prey. Neither
is it, in general, much easier to escape pursuit at the isles of
Polynesia. Those of them which have felt a civilizing influence present
the same difficulty to the runaway with the Peruvian ports, the
advanced natives being quite as mercenary and keen of knife and scent
as the retrograde Spaniards; while, owing to the bad odor in which all
Europeans lie, in the minds of aboriginal savages who have chanced to
hear aught of them, to desert the ship among primitive Polynesians, is,
in most cases, a hope not unforlorn. Hence the Enchanted Isles become
the voluntary tarrying places of all sorts of refugees; some of whom
too sadly experience the fact, that flight from tyranny does not of
itself insure a safe asylum, far less a happy home.

Moreover, it has not seldom happened that hermits have been made upon
the isles by the accidents incident to tortoise-hunting. The interior
of most of them is tangled and difficult of passage beyond description;
the air is sultry and stifling; an intolerable thirst is provoked, for
which no running stream offers its kind relief. In a few hours, under
an equatorial sun, reduced by these causes to entire exhaustion, woe
betide the straggler at the Enchanted Isles! Their extent is such as to
forbid an adequate search, unless weeks are devoted to it. The
impatient ship waits a day or two; when, the missing man remaining
undiscovered, up goes a stake on the beach, with a letter of regret,
and a keg of crackers and another of water tied to it, and away sails
the craft.

Nor have there been wanting instances where the inhumanity of some
captains has led them to wreak a secure revenge upon seamen who have
given their caprice or pride some singular offense. Thrust ashore upon
the scorching marl, such mariners are abandoned to perish outright,
unless by solitary labors they succeed in discovering some precious
dribblets of moisture oozing from a rock or stagnant in a mountain
pool.

I was well acquainted with a man, who, lost upon the Isle of
Narborough, was brought to such extremes by thirst, that at last he
only saved his life by taking that of another being. A large hair-seal
came upon the beach. He rushed upon it, stabbed it in the neck, and
then throwing himself upon the panting body quaffed at the living
wound; the palpitations of the creature’s dying heart injected life
into the drinker.

Another seaman, thrust ashore in a boat upon an isle at which no ship
ever touched, owing to its peculiar sterility and the shoals about it,
and from which all other parts of the group were hidden—this man,
feeling that it was sure death to remain there, and that nothing worse
than death menaced him in quitting it, killed seals, and inflating
their skins, made a float, upon which he transported himself to
Charles’s Island, and joined the republic there.

But men, not endowed with courage equal to such desperate attempts,
find their only resource in forthwith seeking some watering-place,
however precarious or scanty; building a hut; catching tortoises and
birds; and in all respects preparing for a hermit life, till tide or
time, or a passing ship arrives to float them off.

At the foot of precipices on many of the isles, small rude basins in
the rocks are found, partly filled with rotted rubbish or vegetable
decay, or overgrown with thickets, and sometimes a little moist; which,
upon examination, reveal plain tokens of artificial instruments
employed in hollowing them out, by some poor castaway or still more
miserable runaway. These basins are made in places where it was
supposed some scanty drops of dew might exude into them from the upper
crevices.

The relics of hermitages and stone basins are not the only signs of
vanishing humanity to be found upon the isles. And, curious to say,
that spot which of all others in settled communities is most animated,
at the Enchanted Isles presents the most dreary of aspects. And though
it may seem very strange to talk of post-offices in this barren region,
yet post-offices are occasionally to be found there. They consist of a
stake and a bottle. The letters being not only sealed, but corked. They
are generally deposited by captains of Nantucketers for the benefit of
passing fishermen, and contain statements as to what luck they had in
whaling or tortoise-hunting. Frequently, however, long months and
months, whole years glide by and no applicant appears. The stake rots
and falls, presenting no very exhilarating object.

If now it be added that grave-stones, or rather grave-boards, are also
discovered upon some of the isles, the picture will be complete.

Upon the beach of James’s Isle, for many years, was to be seen a rude
finger-post, pointing inland. And, perhaps, taking it for some signal
of possible hospitality in this otherwise desolate spot—some good
hermit living there with his maple dish—the stranger would follow on in
the path thus indicated, till at last he would come out in a noiseless
nook, and find his only welcome, a dead man—his sole greeting the
inscription over a grave. Here, in 1813, fell, in a daybreak duel, a
lieutenant of the U.S. frigate Essex, aged twenty-one: attaining his
majority in death.

It is but fit that, like those old monastic institutions of Europe,
whose inmates go not out of their own walls to be inurned, but are
entombed there where they die, the Encantadas, too, should bury their
own dead, even as the great general monastery of earth does hers.

It is known that burial in the ocean is a pure necessity of sea-faring
life, and that it is only done when land is far astern, and not clearly
visible from the bow. Hence, to vessels cruising in the vicinity of the
Enchanted Isles, they afford a convenient Potter’s Field. The interment
over, some good-natured forecastle poet and artist seizes his
paint-brush, and inscribes a doggerel epitaph. When, after a long lapse
of time, other good-natured seamen chance to come upon the spot, they
usually make a table of the mound, and quaff a friendly can to the poor
soul’s repose.

As a specimen of these epitaphs, take the following, found in a bleak
gorge of Chatham Isle:—

“Oh, Brother Jack, as you pass by,
As you are now, so once was I.
Just so game, and just so gay,
But now, alack, they’ve stopped my pay.
No more I peep out of my blinkers,
Here I be—tucked in with clinkers!”




THE BELL-TOWER.


In the south of Europe, nigh a once frescoed capital, now with dank
mould cankering its bloom, central in a plain, stands what, at
distance, seems the black mossed stump of some immeasurable pine,
fallen, in forgotten days, with Anak and the Titan.

As all along where the pine tree falls, its dissolution leaves a mossy
mound—last-flung shadow of the perished trunk; never lengthening, never
lessening; unsubject to the fleet falsities of the sun; shade
immutable, and true gauge which cometh by prostration—so westward from
what seems the stump, one steadfast spear of lichened ruin veins the
plain.

From that tree-top, what birded chimes of silver throats had rung. A
stone pine; a metallic aviary in its crown: the Bell-Tower, built by
the great mechanician, the unblest foundling, Bannadonna.

Like Babel’s, its base was laid in a high hour of renovated earth,
following the second deluge, when the waters of the Dark Ages had dried
up, and once more the green appeared. No wonder that, after so long and
deep submersion, the jubilant expectation of the race should, as with
Noah’s sons, soar into Shinar aspiration.

In firm resolve, no man in Europe at that period went beyond
Bannadonna. Enriched through commerce with the Levant, the state in
which he lived voted to have the noblest Bell-Tower in Italy. His
repute assigned him to be architect.

Stone by stone, month by month, the tower rose. Higher, higher;
snail-like in pace, but torch or rocket in its pride.

After the masons would depart, the builder, standing alone upon its
ever-ascending summit, at close of every day, saw that he overtopped
still higher walls and trees. He would tarry till a late hour there,
wrapped in schemes of other and still loftier piles. Those who of
saints’ days thronged the spot—hanging to the rude poles of
scaffolding, like sailors on yards, or bees on boughs, unmindful of
lime and dust, and falling chips of stone—their homage not the less
inspirited him to self-esteem.

At length the holiday of the Tower came. To the sound of viols, the
climax-stone slowly rose in air, and, amid the firing of ordnance, was
laid by Bannadonna’s hands upon the final course. Then mounting it, he
stood erect, alone, with folded arms, gazing upon the white summits of
blue inland Alps, and whiter crests of bluer Alps off-shore—sights
invisible from the plain. Invisible, too, from thence was that eye he
turned below, when, like the cannon booms, came up to him the people’s
combustions of applause.

That which stirred them so was, seeing with what serenity the builder
stood three hundred feet in air, upon an unrailed perch. This none but
he durst do. But his periodic standing upon the pile, in each stage of
its growth—such discipline had its last result.

Little remained now but the bells. These, in all respects, must
correspond with their receptacle.

The minor ones were prosperously cast. A highly enriched one followed,
of a singular make, intended for suspension in a manner before unknown.
The purpose of this bell, its rotary motion, and connection with the
clock-work, also executed at the time, will, in the sequel, receive
mention.

In the one erection, bell-tower and clock-tower were united, though,
before that period, such structures had commonly been built distinct;
as the Campanile and Torre del ’Orologio of St. Mark to this day
attest.

But it was upon the great state-bell that the founder lavished his more
daring skill. In vain did some of the less elated magistrates here
caution him; saying that though truly the tower was Titanic, yet limit
should be set to the dependent weight of its swaying masses. But
undeterred, he prepared his mammoth mould, dented with mythological
devices; kindled his fires of balsamic firs; melted his tin and copper,
and, throwing in much plate, contributed by the public spirit of the
nobles, let loose the tide.

The unleashed metals bayed like hounds. The workmen shrunk. Through
their fright, fatal harm to the bell was dreaded. Fearless as Shadrach,
Bannadonna, rushing through the glow, smote the chief culprit with his
ponderous ladle. From the smitten part, a splinter was dashed into the
seething mass, and at once was melted in.

Next day a portion of the work was heedfully uncovered. All seemed
right. Upon the third morning, with equal satisfaction, it was bared
still lower. At length, like some old Theban king, the whole cooled
casting was disinterred. All was fair except in one strange spot. But
as he suffered no one to attend him in these inspections, he concealed
the blemish by some preparation which none knew better to devise.

The casting of such a mass was deemed no small triumph for the caster;
one, too, in which the state might not scorn to share. The homicide was
overlooked. By the charitable that deed was but imputed to sudden
transports of esthetic passion, not to any flagitious quality. A kick
from an Arabian charger; not sign of vice, but blood.

His felony remitted by the judge, absolution given him by the priest,
what more could even a sickly conscience have desired.

Honoring the tower and its builder with another holiday, the republic
witnessed the hoisting of the bells and clock-work amid shows and pomps
superior to the former.

Some months of more than usual solitude on Bannadonna’s part ensued. It
was not unknown that he was engaged upon something for the belfry,
intended to complete it, and surpass all that had gone before. Most
people imagined that the design would involve a casting like the bells.
But those who thought they had some further insight, would shake their
heads, with hints, that not for nothing did the mechanician keep so
secret. Meantime, his seclusion failed not to invest his work with more
or less of that sort of mystery pertaining to the forbidden.

Ere long he had a heavy object hoisted to the belfry, wrapped in a dark
sack or cloak—a procedure sometimes had in the case of an elaborate
piece of sculpture, or statue, which, being intended to grace the front
of a new edifice, the architect does not desire exposed to critical
eyes, till set up, finished, in its appointed place. Such was the
impression now. But, as the object rose, a statuary present observed,
or thought he did, that it was not entirely rigid, but was, in a
manner, pliant. At last, when the hidden thing had attained its final
height, and, obscurely seen from below, seemed almost of itself to step
into the belfry, as if with little assistance from the crane, a shrewd
old blacksmith present ventured the suspicion that it was but a living
man. This surmise was thought a foolish one, while the general interest
failed not to augment.

Not without demur from Bannadonna, the chief-magistrate of the town,
with an associate—both elderly men—followed what seemed the image up
the tower. But, arrived at the belfry, they had little recompense.
Plausibly entrenching himself behind the conceded mysteries of his art,
the mechanician withheld present explanation. The magistrates glanced
toward the cloaked object, which, to their surprise, seemed now to have
changed its attitude, or else had before been more perplexingly
concealed by the violent muffling action of the wind without. It seemed
now seated upon some sort of frame, or chair, contained within the
domino. They observed that nigh the top, in a sort of square, the web
of the cloth, either from accident or design, had its warp partly
withdrawn, and the cross threads plucked out here and there, so as to
form a sort of woven grating. Whether it were the low wind or no,
stealing through the stone lattice-work, or only their own perturbed
imaginations, is uncertain, but they thought they discerned a slight
sort of fitful, spring-like motion, in the domino. Nothing, however
incidental or insignificant, escaped their uneasy eyes. Among other
things, they pried out, in a corner, an earthen cup, partly corroded
and partly encrusted, and one whispered to the other, that this cup was
just such a one as might, in mockery, be offered to the lips of some
brazen statue, or, perhaps, still worse.

But, being questioned, the mechanician said, that the cup was simply
used in his founder’s business, and described the purpose; in short, a
cup to test the condition of metals in fusion. He added, that it had
got into the belfry by the merest chance.

Again, and again, they gazed at the domino, as at some suspicious
incognito at a Venetian mask. All sorts of vague apprehensions stirred
them. They even dreaded lest, when they should descend, the
mechanician, though without a flesh and blood companion, for all that,
would not be left alone.

Affecting some merriment at their disquietude, he begged to relieve
them, by extending a coarse sheet of workman’s canvas between them and
the object.

Meantime he sought to interest them in his other work; nor, now that
the domino was out of sight, did they long remain insensible to the
artistic wonders lying round them; wonders hitherto beheld but in their
unfinished state; because, since hoisting the bells, none but the
caster had entered within the belfry. It was one trait of his, that,
even in details, he would not let another do what he could, without too
great loss of time, accomplish for himself. So, for several preceding
weeks, whatever hours were unemployed in his secret design, had been
devoted to elaborating the figures on the bells.

The clock-bell, in particular, now drew attention. Under a patient
chisel, the latent beauty of its enrichments, before obscured by the
cloudings incident to casting, that beauty in its shyest grace, was now
revealed. Round and round the bell, twelve figures of gay girls,
garlanded, hand-in-hand, danced in a choral ring—the embodied hours.

“Bannadonna,” said the chief, “this bell excels all else. No added
touch could here improve. Hark!” hearing a sound, “was that the wind?”

“The wind, Excellenza,” was the light response. “But the figures, they
are not yet without their faults. They need some touches yet. When
those are given, and the—block yonder,” pointing towards the canvas
screen, “when Haman there, as I merrily call him,—him? _it_, I
mean—when Haman is fixed on this, his lofty tree, then, gentlemen, will
I be most happy to receive you here again.”

The equivocal reference to the object caused some return of
restlessness. However, on their part, the visitors forbore further
allusion to it, unwilling, perhaps, to let the foundling see how easily
it lay within his plebeian art to stir the placid dignity of nobles.

“Well, Bannadonna,” said the chief, “how long ere you are ready to set
the clock going, so that the hour shall be sounded? Our interest in
you, not less than in the work itself, makes us anxious to be assured
of your success. The people, too,—why, they are shouting now. Say the
exact hour when you will be ready.”

“To-morrow, Excellenza, if you listen for it,—or should you not, all
the same—strange music will be heard. The stroke of one shall be the
first from yonder bell,” pointing to the bell adorned with girls and
garlands, “that stroke shall fall there, where the hand of Una clasps
Dua’s. The stroke of one shall sever that loved clasp. To-morrow, then,
at one o’clock, as struck here, precisely here,” advancing and placing
his finger upon the clasp, “the poor mechanic will be most happy once
more to give you liege audience, in this his littered shop. Farewell
till then, illustrious magnificoes, and hark ye for your vassal’s
stroke.”

His still, Vulcanic face hiding its burning brightness like a forge, he
moved with ostentatious deference towards the scuttle, as if so far to
escort their exit. But the junior magistrate, a kind-hearted man,
troubled at what seemed to him a certain sardonical disdain, lurking
beneath the foundling’s humble mien, and in Christian sympathy more
distressed at it on his account than on his own, dimly surmising what
might be the final fate of such a cynic solitaire, nor perhaps
uninfluenced by the general strangeness of surrounding things, this
good magistrate had glanced sadly, sideways from the speaker, and
thereupon his foreboding eye had started at the expression of the
unchanging face of the Hour Una.

“How is this, Bannadonna?” he lowly asked, “Una looks unlike her
sisters.”

“In Christ’s name, Bannadonna,” impulsively broke in the chief, his
attention, for the first attracted to the figure, by his associate’s
remark, “Una’s face looks just like that of Deborah, the prophetess, as
painted by the Florentine, Del Fonca.”

“Surely, Bannadonna,” lowly resumed the milder magistrate, “you meant
the twelve should wear the same jocundly abandoned air. But see, the
smile of Una seems but a fatal one. ’Tis different.”

While his mild associate was speaking, the chief glanced, inquiringly,
from him to the caster, as if anxious to mark how the discrepancy would
be accounted for. As the chief stood, his advanced foot was on the
scuttle’s curb.

Bannadonna spoke:

“Excellenza, now that, following your keener eye, I glance upon the
face of Una, I do, indeed perceive some little variance. But look all
round the bell, and you will find no two faces entirely correspond.
Because there is a law in art—but the cold wind is rising more; these
lattices are but a poor defense. Suffer me, magnificoes, to conduct
you, at least, partly on your way. Those in whose well-being there is a
public stake, should be heedfully attended.”

“Touching the look of Una, you were saying, Bannadonna, that there was
a certain law in art,” observed the chief, as the three now descended
the stone shaft, “pray, tell me, then—.”

“Pardon; another time, Excellenza;—the tower is damp.”

“Nay, I must rest, and hear it now. Here,—here is a wide landing, and
through this leeward slit, no wind, but ample light. Tell us of your
law; and at large.”

“Since, Excellenza, you insist, know that there is a law in art, which
bars the possibility of duplicates. Some years ago, you may remember, I
graved a small seal for your republic, bearing, for its chief device,
the head of your own ancestor, its illustrious founder. It becoming
necessary, for the customs’ use, to have innumerable impressions for
bales and boxes, I graved an entire plate, containing one hundred of
the seals. Now, though, indeed, my object was to have those hundred
heads identical, and though, I dare say, people think them; so, yet,
upon closely scanning an uncut impression from the plate, no two of
those five-score faces, side by side, will be found alike. Gravity is
the air of all; but, diversified in all. In some, benevolent; in some,
ambiguous; in two or three, to a close scrutiny, all but incipiently
malign, the variation of less than a hair’s breadth in the linear
shadings round the mouth sufficing to all this. Now, Excellenza,
transmute that general gravity into joyousness, and subject it to
twelve of those variations I have described, and tell me, will you not
have my hours here, and Una one of them? But I like—.”

“Hark! is that—a footfall above?”

“Mortar, Excellenza; sometimes it drops to the belfry-floor from the
arch where the stonework was left undressed. I must have it seen to. As
I was about to say: for one, I like this law forbidding duplicates. It
evokes fine personalities. Yes, Excellenza, that strange, and—to
you—uncertain smile, and those fore-looking eyes of Una, suit
Bannadonna very well.”

“Hark!—sure we left no soul above?”

“No soul, Excellenza; rest assured, no _soul_—Again the mortar.”

“It fell not while we were there.”

“Ah, in your presence, it better knew its place, Excellenza,” blandly
bowed Bannadonna.

“But, Una,” said the milder magistrate, “she seemed intently gazing on
you; one would have almost sworn that she picked you out from among us
three.”

“If she did, possibly, it might have been her finer apprehension,
Excellenza.”

“How, Bannadonna? I do not understand you.”

“No consequence, no consequence, Excellenza—but the shifted wind is
blowing through the slit. Suffer me to escort you on; and then, pardon,
but the toiler must to his tools.”

“It may be foolish, Signor,” said the milder magistrate, as, from the
third landing, the two now went down unescorted, “but, somehow, our
great mechanician moves me strangely. Why, just now, when he so
superciliously replied, his walk seemed Sisera’s, God’s vain foe, in
Del Fonca’s painting. And that young, sculptured Deborah, too. Ay, and
that—.”

“Tush, tush, Signor!” returned the chief. “A passing whim.
Deborah?—Where’s Jael, pray?”

“Ah,” said the other, as they now stepped upon the sod, “Ah, Signor, I
see you leave your fears behind you with the chill and gloom; but mine,
even in this sunny air, remain. Hark!”

It was a sound from just within the tower door, whence they had
emerged. Turning, they saw it closed.

“He has slipped down and barred us out,” smiled the chief; “but it is
his custom.”

Proclamation was now made, that the next day, at one hour after
meridian, the clock would strike, and—thanks to the mechanician’s
powerful art—with unusual accompaniments. But what those should be,
none as yet could say. The announcement was received with cheers.

By the looser sort, who encamped about the tower all night, lights were
seen gleaming through the topmost blind-work, only disappearing with
the morning sun. Strange sounds, too, were heard, or were thought to
be, by those whom anxious watching might not have left mentally
undisturbed—sounds, not only of some ringing implement, but also—so
they said—half-suppressed screams and plainings, such as might have
issued from some ghostly engine, overplied.

Slowly the day drew on; part of the concourse chasing the weary time
with songs and games, till, at last, the great blurred sun rolled, like
a football, against the plain.

At noon, the nobility and principal citizens came from the town in
cavalcade, a guard of soldiers, also, with music, the more to honor the
occasion.

Only one hour more. Impatience grew. Watches were held in hands of
feverish men, who stood, now scrutinizing their small dial-plates, and
then, with neck thrown back, gazing toward the belfry, as if the eye
might foretell that which could only be made sensible to the ear; for,
as yet, there was no dial to the tower-clock.

The hour hands of a thousand watches now verged within a hair’s breadth
of the figure 1. A silence, as of the expectation of some Shiloh,
pervaded the swarming plain. Suddenly a dull, mangled sound—naught
ringing in it; scarcely audible, indeed, to the outer circles of the
people—that dull sound dropped heavily from the belfry. At the same
moment, each man stared at his neighbor blankly. All watches were
upheld. All hour-hands were at—had passed—the figure 1. No bell-stroke
from the tower. The multitude became tumultuous.

Waiting a few moments, the chief magistrate, commanding silence, hailed
the belfry, to know what thing unforeseen had happened there.

No response.

He hailed again and yet again.

All continued hushed.

By his order, the soldiers burst in the tower-door; when, stationing
guards to defend it from the now surging mob, the chief, accompanied by
his former associate, climbed the winding stairs. Half-way up, they
stopped to listen. No sound. Mounting faster, they reached the belfry;
but, at the threshold, started at the spectacle disclosed. A spaniel,
which, unbeknown to them, had followed them thus far, stood shivering
as before some unknown monster in a brake: or, rather, as if it snuffed
footsteps leading to some other world.

Bannadonna lay, prostrate and bleeding, at the base of the bell which
was adorned with girls and garlands. He lay at the feet of the hour
Una; his head coinciding, in a vertical line, with her left hand,
clasped by the hour Dua. With downcast face impending over him, like
Jael over nailed Sisera in the tent, was the domino; now no more
becloaked.

It had limbs, and seemed clad in a scaly mail, lustrous as a
dragon-beetle’s. It was manacled, and its clubbed arms were uplifted,
as if, with its manacles, once more to smite its already smitten
victim. One advanced foot of it was inserted beneath the dead body, as
if in the act of spurning it.

Uncertainty falls on what now followed.

It were but natural to suppose that the magistrates would, at first,
shrink from immediate personal contact with what they saw. At the
least, for a time, they would stand in involuntary doubt; it may be, in
more or less of horrified alarm. Certain it is, that an arquebuss was
called for from below. And some add, that its report, followed by a
fierce whiz, as of the sudden snapping of a main-spring, with a steely
din, as if a stack of sword-blades should be dashed upon a pavement,
these blended sounds came ringing to the plain, attracting every eye
far upward to the belfry, whence, through the lattice-work, thin
wreaths of smoke were curling.

Some averred that it was the spaniel, gone mad by fear, which was shot.
This, others denied. True it was, the spaniel never more was seen; and,
probably, for some unknown reason, it shared the burial now to be
related of the domino. For, whatever the preceding circumstances may
have been, the first instinctive panic over, or else all ground of
reasonable fear removed, the two magistrates, by themselves, quickly
rehooded the figure in the dropped cloak wherein it had been hoisted.
The same night, it was secretly lowered to the ground, smuggled to the
beach, pulled far out to sea, and sunk. Nor to any after urgency, even
in free convivial hours, would the twain ever disclose the full secrets
of the belfry.

From the mystery unavoidably investing it, the popular solution of the
foundling’s fate involved more or less of supernatural agency. But some
few less unscientific minds pretended to find little difficulty in
otherwise accounting for it. In the chain of circumstantial inferences
drawn, there may, or may not, have been some absent or defective links.
But, as the explanation in question is the only one which tradition has
explicitly preserved, in dearth of better, it will here be given. But,
in the first place, it is requisite to present the supposition
entertained as to the entire motive and mode, with their origin, of the
secret design of Bannadonna; the minds above-mentioned assuming to
penetrate as well into his soul as into the event. The disclosure will
indirectly involve reference to peculiar matters, none of, the
clearest, beyond the immediate subject.

At that period, no large bell was made to sound otherwise than as at
present, by agitation of a tongue within, by means of ropes, or
percussion from without, either from cumbrous machinery, or stalwart
watchmen, armed with heavy hammers, stationed in the belfry, or in
sentry-boxes on the open roof, according as the bell was sheltered or
exposed.

It was from observing these exposed bells, with their watchmen, that
the foundling, as was opined, derived the first suggestion of his
scheme. Perched on a great mast or spire, the human figure, viewed from
below, undergoes such a reduction in its apparent size, as to
obliterate its intelligent features. It evinces no personality. Instead
of bespeaking volition, its gestures rather resemble the automatic ones
of the arms of a telegraph.

Musing, therefore, upon the purely Punchinello aspect of the human
figure thus beheld, it had indirectly occurred to Bannadonna to devise
some metallic agent, which should strike the hour with its mechanic
hand, with even greater precision than the vital one. And, moreover, as
the vital watchman on the roof, sallying from his retreat at the given
periods, walked to the bell with uplifted mace, to smite it, Bannadonna
had resolved that his invention should likewise possess the power of
locomotion, and, along with that, the appearance, at least, of
intelligence and will.

If the conjectures of those who claimed acquaintance with the intent of
Bannadonna be thus far correct, no unenterprising spirit could have
been his. But they stopped not here; intimating that though, indeed,
his design had, in the first place, been prompted by the sight of the
watchman, and confined to the devising of a subtle substitute for him:
yet, as is not seldom the case with projectors, by insensible
gradations, proceeding from comparatively pigmy aims to Titanic ones,
the original scheme had, in its anticipated eventualities, at last,
attained to an unheard of degree of daring.

He still bent his efforts upon the locomotive figure for the belfry,
but only as a partial type of an ulterior creature, a sort of
elephantine Helot, adapted to further, in a degree scarcely to be
imagined, the universal conveniences and glories of humanity; supplying
nothing less than a supplement to the Six Days’ Work; stocking the
earth with a new serf, more useful than the ox, swifter than the
dolphin, stronger than the lion, more cunning than the ape, for
industry an ant, more fiery than serpents, and yet, in patience,
another ass. All excellences of all God-made creatures, which served
man, were here to receive advancement, and then to be combined in one.
Talus was to have been the all-accomplished Helot’s name. Talus, iron
slave to Bannadonna, and, through him, to man.

Here, it might well be thought that, were these last conjectures as to
the foundling’s secrets not erroneous, then must he have been
hopelessly infected with the craziest chimeras of his age; far outgoing
Albert Magus and Cornelius Agrippa. But the contrary was averred.
However marvelous his design, however apparently transcending not alone
the bounds of human invention, but those of divine creation, yet the
proposed means to be employed were alleged to have been confined within
the sober forms of sober reason. It was affirmed that, to a degree of
more than skeptic scorn, Bannadonna had been without sympathy for any
of the vain-glorious irrationalities of his time. For example, he had
not concluded, with the visionaries among the metaphysicians, that
between the finer mechanic forces and the ruder animal vitality some
germ of correspondence might prove discoverable. As little did his
scheme partake of the enthusiasm of some natural philosophers, who
hoped, by physiological and chemical inductions, to arrive at a
knowledge of the source of life, and so qualify themselves to
manufacture and improve upon it. Much less had he aught in common with
the tribe of alchemists, who sought, by a species of incantations, to
evoke some surprising vitality from the laboratory. Neither had he
imagined, with certain sanguine theosophists, that, by faithful
adoration of the Highest, unheard-of powers would be vouchsafed to man.
A practical materialist, what Bannadonna had aimed at was to have been
reached, not by logic, not by crucible, not by conjuration, not by
altars; but by plain vice-bench and hammer. In short, to solve nature,
to steal into her, to intrigue beyond her, to procure some one else to
bind her to his hand;—these, one and all, had not been his objects;
but, asking no favors from any element or any being, of himself, to
rival her, outstrip her, and rule her. He stooped to conquer. With him,
common sense was theurgy; machinery, miracle; Prometheus, the heroic
name for machinist; man, the true God.

Nevertheless, in his initial step, so far as the experimental automaton
for the belfry was concerned, he allowed fancy some little play; or,
perhaps, what seemed his fancifulness was but his utilitarian ambition
collaterally extended. In figure, the creature for the belfry should
not be likened after the human pattern, nor any animal one, nor after
the ideals, however wild, of ancient fable, but equally in aspect as in
organism be an original production; the more terrible to behold, the
better.

Such, then, were the suppositions as to the present scheme, and the
reserved intent. How, at the very threshold, so unlooked for a
catastrophe overturned all, or rather, what was the conjecture here, is
now to be set forth.

It was thought that on the day preceding the fatality, his visitors
having left him, Bannadonna had unpacked the belfry image, adjusted it,
and placed it in the retreat provided—a sort of sentry-box in one
corner of the belfry; in short, throughout the night, and for some part
of the ensuing morning, he had been engaged in arranging everything
connected with the domino; the issuing from the sentry-box each sixty
minutes; sliding along a grooved way, like a railway; advancing to the
clock-bell, with uplifted manacles; striking it at one of the twelve
junctions of the four-and-twenty hands; then wheeling, circling the
bell, and retiring to its post, there to bide for another sixty
minutes, when the same process was to be repeated; the bell, by a
cunning mechanism, meantime turning on its vertical axis, so as to
present, to the descending mace, the clasped hands of the next two
figures, when it would strike two, three, and so on, to the end. The
musical metal in this time-bell being so managed in the fusion, by some
art, perishing with its originator, that each of the clasps of the
four-and-twenty hands should give forth its own peculiar resonance when
parted.

But on the magic metal, the magic and metallic stranger never struck
but that one stroke, drove but that one nail, served but that one
clasp, by which Bannadonna clung to his ambitious life. For, after
winding up the creature in the sentry-box, so that, for the present,
skipping the intervening hours, it should not emerge till the hour of
one, but should then infallibly emerge, and, after deftly oiling the
grooves whereon it was to slide, it was surmised that the mechanician
must then have hurried to the bell, to give his final touches to its
sculpture. True artist, he here became absorbed; and absorption still
further intensified, it may be, by his striving to abate that strange
look of Una; which, though, before others, he had treated with such
unconcern, might not, in secret, have been without its thorn.

And so, for the interval, he was oblivious of his creature; which, not
oblivious of him, and true to its creation, and true to its heedful
winding up, left its post precisely at the given moment; along its
well-oiled route, slid noiselessly towards its mark; and, aiming at the
hand of Una, to ring one clangorous note, dully smote the intervening
brain of Bannadonna, turned backwards to it; the manacled arms then
instantly up-springing to their hovering poise. The falling body
clogged the thing’s return; so there it stood, still impending over
Bannadonna, as if whispering some post-mortem terror. The chisel lay
dropped from the hand, but beside the hand; the oil-flask spilled
across the iron track.

In his unhappy end, not unmindful of the rare genius of the
mechanician, the republic decreed him a stately funeral. It was
resolved that the great bell—the one whose casting had been jeopardized
through the timidity of the ill-starred workman—should be rung upon the
entrance of the bier into the cathedral. The most robust man of the
country round was assigned the office of bell-ringer.

But as the pall-bearers entered the cathedral porch, naught but a
broken and disastrous sound, like that of some lone Alpine land-slide,
fell from the tower upon their ears. And then, all was hushed.

Glancing backwards, they saw the groined belfry crashed sideways in. It
afterwards appeared that the powerful peasant, who had the bell-rope in
charge, wishing to test at once the full glory of the bell, had swayed
down upon the rope with one concentrate jerk. The mass of quaking
metal, too ponderous for its frame, and strangely feeble somewhere at
its top, loosed from its fastening, tore sideways down, and tumbling in
one sheer fall, three hundred feet to the soft sward below, buried
itself inverted and half out of sight.

Upon its disinterment, the main fracture was found to have started from
a small spot in the ear; which, being scraped, revealed a defect,
deceptively minute in the casting; which defect must subsequently have
been pasted over with some unknown compound.

The remolten metal soon reassumed its place in the tower’s repaired
superstructure. For one year the metallic choir of birds sang musically
in its belfry-bough-work of sculptured blinds and traceries. But on the
first anniversary of the tower’s completion—at early dawn, before the
concourse had surrounded it—an earthquake came; one loud crash was
heard. The stone-pine, with all its bower of songsters, lay overthrown
upon the plain.

So the blind slave obeyed its blinder lord; but, in obedience, slew
him. So the creator was killed by the creature. So the bell was too
heavy for the tower. So the bell’s main weakness was where man’s blood
had flawed it. And so pride went before the fall.
